Call this workshop of the city council to order
on Tuesday, January 13th, 2026.
If you wish to please stand with me to pledge allegiance
to the republic, that it's the
United States of America. I pledge all pledge
Allegiance to flag of the United States of America
and to the republic for which it stands,
one nation under God, invisible with liberty
and justice for all.
Mr. City Manager, may we have a roll call, please?
Sure. Counselor Scott. Uh, present. Councilor Walker?
Here. Councilor Coleman? Here. Mayor Tipton. Here.
Counselor Pride. Here. Councilor West here.
And Counselor Matthews. Yes sir.
Thank you. It is great to see all of you here today
and we have, um, some clarifications for me to make
as we start our workshop.
First, I want to welcome all of you,
our South Portland neighbors,
to this important workshop for our city.
The reason that our city holds a workshop is
to learn about a topic
and then to give guidance to the city manager
on the council's preferences
and recommendations for matters related to that topic.
Excuse me. We have two workshop topics this evening,
the Mahoney City Center and the housing ordinance updates.
So I would briefly like to give you an idea of
how we've structured the evening.
The first topic will have us hearing from presenters, um,
who are our city manager, Scott Morelli,
and he's going to discuss the process
and the milestones that have brought us to this moment
in the work to consider a Mahoney city center.
Um, then guess what?
Yours truly will briefly remind us all of the work
that the city council asked the Mahoney committee to do.
Then Mike Halsey, who is the Mahoney committee chair,
is going to review the committee's work
through the vote in December
to make a project recommendation to our council.
And then after that, Craig Piper,
who is our project architect with SMRT Architects
and Engineers, is going to review the project
that has been recommended
and the cost estimates that are attached to it.
And he also will review the cost estimates
to refurbish the current city facilities.
Okay. Our counselors at will have the chance
to ask questions of each of the presenters.
And after all four of the presenters have spoken
and counselors have asked questions, then it will be time
for members of the public to have a chance
to make their comments.
And then the council will have a discussion
and that's how we'll form our recommendations
to make to the city manager.
We will repeat that process for the topic
of the housing ordinance updates, which is to be presented
by city planning director Milan Neveda.
The only thing that would prevent
that is if our Mahoney discussion
goes long enough that we feel that it would be better
to postpone Milan's presentation.
Finally, during the last part of this evening's workshop,
we're going to hear two workshop proposals,
and we're also gonna discuss the current
workshop schedule ahead.
So I would like to be clear
and review the rules for public comment
during a council workshop.
It's a bit different than a regular
council business meeting.
Unlike a business meeting,
our workshops limit public comment
to the workshop topic only.
That means that this evening we'll take public comment on
our two topics, Mahoney City Center
and housing ordinance updates.
But I'm afraid that's all we can hear public comment about.
We do not offer an open public comment period at our
workshops and we do not hear public comment
on workshop proposals.
Might be disappointing
'cause certainly there's a lot
to make comment about in our city,
in our country these days,
but that's how a council workshop works.
So I wanted to be clear,
and I would hate if someone did not understand that
public comments limited to three minutes.
You're going to see a timer running when you're making
comments on both the screens.
The city manager is going
to remind anyone who's making comments when you have 30
seconds left to bring comments to a close.
So that's our show for tonight.
Really, really happy to see so many of our neighbors here
and also, um, counselors have been receiving a lot of, um,
public comment via our own email, which is also helpful.
So thank you. And now, Mr. City Manager please.
Okay, thanks for the introduction, mayor.
Um, the mayor had noted there's a number of folks
that are gonna be presenting tonight.
The bulk of that will come from Craig Piper, uh, at SMRT,
but there are a few things that we wanted
to discuss in advance, um, just to set the stage.
Um, a reminder for the councilors, some of whom, um,
have joined the council
after, um, this project started, uh, as well as members
of the public, just to have a refresher on, um,
how we got here, which has been
of course over the course of several years.
So, uh, going back to the pre pandemic days in 2019,
south Portland hired its first ever director
of facilities charged with maintaining.
Um, and, uh, looking
after the condition of all city facilities, uh, in specific,
one of the things that the director was tasked
with was looking into the existing conditions
of this building, the main library,
the Hamlin School building, along with, uh,
our police department in Central Fire Station.
Um, studies for which had already, uh, begun, uh,
been undertaken in August of 2021,
Sebago NICs, who was the consultant hired to take a look at,
uh, our police and fire stations
provided that, uh, overview to the council
of the existing conditions there, as well
as potential options for renovations, uh,
at those facilities with costs as high as $46 million just
for, uh, police and fire.
It's important to remember a few years prior
to this council had heard an update on the conditions
of the Hamlin School building.
So there was a presentation, um, on the needs of
that facility, which was an old school building,
and a lot of departments were moved in there temporarily,
while a longer term solution could be figured out.
Um, uh, that, uh, that school building,
old school building houses, our planning,
economic development code enforcement,
and more recently our sustainability
and IT offices at the time, counselors directed staff
to invest limited dollars into that building.
Again, understanding that that's a short term solution,
so we don't want to dump a ton of money into it.
Uh, in September of 2021,
the council created the ad Hoc City Facilities Planning
Committee comprised of residents and staff.
This committee was charged with studying the needs
of those buildings, conducting alternatives, analysis, uh,
and consider anything from renovating on site to
relocating certain facilities to different pieces of land
or to be acquired pieces of land, and then to come back
and present the council with its recommendations.
This included specifically looking at the Mahoney site
as a possible option, uh, in February of 2024.
After two plus years of work,
the facilities Committee presented
its findings to the council.
Uh, they reviewed a number of different sighting options,
again, onsite, offsite, consolidated, uh, a bunch
of different, uh, a bunch of different looks.
The committee recommended the following,
consolidating the services that we're currently in
that are currently in City Hall, the assessing outbuilding,
the Hamlin building into the Mahoney School,
tearing down the existing police department
and building a new police station next
to Mahoney on the existing field area, renovating
and expanding central fire station on the current fire site
and renovating and expanding the main library
on its current site.
In March of 2014, council held a workshop
to discuss the future use of Mahoney.
Uh, this wasn't just
to talk about the facility committee's recommendation
to use it as a consolidated city campus.
It was, um, also what are some other ideas
that members of the public have?
What would you like to see at Mahoney?
And so the feedback we heard at
that was pretty much evenly split between, uh,
consolidating city services.
There a similar amount also expressed interest in utilizing
the property, uh, for possible affordable housing,
which had been proposed
by the South Portland Housing Authority.
Uh, at the time, the council had expressed an interest in
learning more about the possible reuse of Mahoney
for both housing, uh, or consolidated city services.
And as such, it's scheduled, uh, another workshop
to talk about, uh, what to do in April.
Okay. Thank you very much Scott,
and I'll continue our project timeline.
I think it's important that we do it this way
because it has been a journey.
It's been a year's long journey.
So the next thing
that happened is June four in 2024.
Are you going to be able to advance that? Uh,
I didn't talk about this one. If you
want to chop the April, um,
Oh, okay. I have
a check mark to start with June. All right.
April, I can cover April.
You're right, I'm supposed to do that.
Okay, Scott, You can tell we rehearsed this really
well, my bad.
Uh, April 16th, as I mentioned that,
that's when the housing authority came,
presented the additional details about their plan
for housing at Mahoney.
And city staff, um, at
that time presented a revised proposal
that then incorporated the main library into the Mahoney
project, which created kind of more of a city campus feel
that was slightly, um, that was projected
to slightly increase the, um, projected project costs,
but it did serve to free up an additional site
for future redevelopment, whatever that might be.
So now you'd have the main library, city hall
and Hamlin available for some sort of future use,
affordable housing, uh, what have you.
But that would be up to the council to determine
that if it was used for housing those three sites,
it was determined could fit more housing units than
the Mahoney site itself.
So this is when the council opted to hire a firm
to conduct an independent review of these two, uh, proposals
to assist in their decision making process. And now,
Thank you very much.
So, yes, we contracted with Frontline Construction Services
to say, look at these two proposals,
come back, give us an opinion.
And that was in June. Then that August,
counsel heard the findings from the consultant.
The findings were in support of the proposal
to consolidate services at Mahoney to include the library
to build a new fire station in the field
and to renovate central fire on the site
that it occupies now.
And a majority of council agreed
with this analysis in September.
That's when the council approved the order directing the
city manager to pursue the redevelopment, to create,
basically to pursue the redevelopment
as I've just described it.
Um, specifically Mahoney school property
for a consolidated city hall library and community arts
and police station fire at current site.
And we did add this as be we thought it was quite important
with thorough consideration of historic significance
of the Mahoney building.
That took us to December.
We awarded the bid for the project's owner representative
to Collier's project leaders.
We then moved through holidays, got to February,
and on February 18th, 2025, last year,
we approved the creation
of the ad hoc Mahoney City Center committee.
I will just remind you that at that point it was
the committee's charge to explore
and bring a recommendation of the project,
as I've just described it.
At that point, we did not say, for example, reconsider
what Mahoney could be like as, um, housing
into in June 17th.
On June 17th, 2025, SMRT presented findings
to the city council that concurred with the recommendations
of, oh, wait a minute, couple, I'm completely outta my mind.
Sorry. How reassuring for all of us.
I just went to the wrong place.
Um, so why are we here?
Because the Mahoney City Center committee,
as it was charged with, did its job and has now March 4th.
Excuse me, me, we're back.
There might be, I don't know if things are in order there.
I think there is a March 4th. I saw.
Sadly, I do not have a March four.
We off the screen and hang on.
We did plan our workshop.
We just didn't do a dress rehearsal. There you go. Alright.
I do have a march. Sorry, I've skipped a whole section.
Anyway, we're back in 2025.
This is after we have formed the committee,
but there was reconsideration
or more consideration, um, of the,
where the police station belonged
and should it be located at Mahoney.
So on March 4th, 2025, the council voted
to amend the order from September 24
to remove reference to the police station.
Being at Mahoney, we,
we really did do a little backwards step and,
or a little back step and say, well, let's review this.
Because we were hearing from members of the community
that they wanted us to do that.
On March 18th, we held a workshop with Collier
to review the previous locations for the police station
that were looked at by the facilities committee.
And, um, excuse me.
We ultimately directed staff
and Collier to review land at the municipal services
facility, as well
as an area abutting the existing police station on the old
Armory property, as well as other possible locations
and compare them to the Mahoney location, bringing us
to May 20th, 2025 when Colliers presented its findings,
including pros and cons of each site,
and recommended continuing with Mahoney as the site
for the new police department.
June 3rd, counsel awarded the bid for Designer services
to SMRT
and also asked that SMRT review pros
and cons of various locations for the police department.
That brings us to June 17th, 2025.
SMRT presented its findings to the council that concurred
with the recommendations of our facilities committee
with frontline, with the Colliers project leaders,
that the Mahoney location is the, is was the superior choice
for the police department.
And at that point, counsel voted
to accept the recommendation.
Okay, now we are at the point where we're going
to invite the chair of the Mahoney committee,
that's Mike Halsey, to discuss the work
that the committee has done since the committee began its
work in March, 2025.
Mike, if you had come up, I'd appreciate that.
And also, it gives me just one moment
to really thank the members of this committee.
We had a lot of interest.
The folks who joined are top-notch
and they've spent a lot of hours listening to presentations
and very thoughtfully considering
and asking questions about what they've been hearing.
Thank you. Mayor Tipton.
Uh, hello, residents of South Poland, members
of the South Poland City Council.
My name is Mike Halsey.
I am chair of the Mahoney City Center Committee.
Uh, many members of the committee are also here in
the audience with me tonight.
As you know, the city council's meeting on February 18th,
the city council approved the ad hoc, uh,
Mahoney City Center Committee.
As Mayor Tipton just said, the purpose
of this c ad hoc committees to assist city staff,
city contractors,
and the city council implementing the order number 34 dash
24 25, which stated
that the city council hereby directs the city manager
to pursue the redevelopment of the Mahoney school property
for the consolidated City Hall Library.
Community Art Center
and thorough considerations should be given
to the significance of the
historic significance of the building.
This shall be accomplished by the following task
that we're assigned to our committee
to facilitate two-way communication with the public
and provide information about the project to assist
and inform referendum vote
to advise the council on certain design elements
of the project, and
to assist in developing a funding plan for the project.
And last, to provide a recommendation
to the city council on a final project design
with cost estimates
and a funding plan to be sent to the voters
for referendum in November.
We're further charged with having a check-in meeting
with the city council on earlier 2026,
which is why we're here today at this workshop.
And then have a final report for the recommendations
to city Council for review, consideration,
and potential approval in June of, uh, 26.
Your order asked in our final report should include a 70%
of the design work completed,
which I think Craig Piper might touch on later.
Uh, and, um,
also an estimated project clause and a funding plan.
The recommendation shall encompass the entire project
with an inspected single bond
referendum question to the voters.
As Mayor Tipton said, please note that the sole purpose
of the committee's work simply put is to come up
with the best design for the Mahoney site for purposes
of a city center campus.
Future use of Mahoney has already been vetted by the council
and was not part of our purview.
Our committee consisted of seven members of the public,
two city councilors, an arts
and theater representative,
a local youth sports representative,
and a representative from the neighborhood of Buddy Mahoney.
Nine city staff also were members of the committee.
The seven members from the public come
with very impressive backgrounds, some
of which are engineer, construction, cost estimator,
an architect, business
and strategy consultant, housing developer,
program manager, and so on.
It has proven to be an excellent collective of professionals
since 2025.
The committee has met seven times
and held numerous public outreach events
to provide information to the public
and seek the input on the project.
We met with the Historic Preservation Committee,
the public arts committee, to obtain their feedback.
Other outreach efforts included the following, 380 described
to our email alerts about the project.
200 plus individuals made 500 plus visits
to the missile buildings during the building crawl.
45 community members provided feedback to the community.
Design. Deep dive.
526 individuals completed community space needs survey,
dozens of high school and middle school
students provided input.
19 news flash items were posted on a project website,
25 frequently asked questions were answered on the webpage.
Three library panel discussions.
Welcome, dozens of attendees
and last 14 informed videos were
posted to the video library.
Shara d the communications director of the city,
is here tonight to answer any questions on that.
Aside from our seven committee members to date,
aside from our seven committee meetings to date,
city staff held 15, uh, met 15 times with, uh,
with the design team since June to come up
with three design proposals,
which are presented to our committee.
At our December 16th meeting,
we reviewed the three proposals that included, one,
preserving the theater and gymnasium.
Two, preserving the gym, but not the theater.
And three, preserving neither.
And although the cost was 2.6% higher to retain the gym,
the theater, the committee selected that
as the best options on
because of significant public input supporting the
preservation of the theater
and gymnasium be part of the project.
At tonight's workshop, Craig Piper of SMRT Architects
and Engineers will review the proposal the committee
selected, uh, as the best option
for the city center campus on the Mahoney site.
Uh, and Ellen Sanborn, the finance director,
will provide an update on the
funding options for this project.
The committee is asking the council to provide us
with guidance on next steps.
Specifically, we are asking you
to confirm whether the council supports
or recommended conceptual plans for the Mahoney campus,
including combined City Hall, uh, Hamlin Library
and existing and into the existing Mahoney building, along
with a new police department in the adjoining field, as well
as a new central fire station.
And two, whether
or not the anti unanticipated price tag
of 194 million changes the direction the council
wishes to take on this project.
I'd like to thank the, the committee members
for all their hard work to date,
and the council for giving the committee members the
opportunity to serve the city of Southport.
Thank you.
Thanks Mike. And hang on for just one minute,
Craig, if you wouldn't mind.
One, I had need to beg Ellen Sanborn's forgiveness
because I did not announce her as a presenter,
so I'm sorry about that.
We will hear from Ellen.
And then the other is, I did say
that counselors would have the opportunity to ask questions
after we heard from each presenter.
It could be counselors that your questions
you're keeping track of,
and then we ask them when the presentations are finished
and then you the most appropriate person answers.
But is there anyone who has a pressing question they
would like to ask Mike?
Okay, thank you very much.
So, just to close out
before we turn over to Craig, I wanna echo the mayor
and chair Halsey for thanking
the M three C committee members.
There was a lot of work, um, that went into this
and, um, even though the number was surprising, even
to the design team itself, uh,
it doesn't take away from the excellent work that, um,
the committee has done providing the council, uh,
the information that, um, it's seeking
to help make a decision.
A few things that I just wanted to clarify
because they're questions that kind of come up a lot.
Before we turn it over to the, to the fuller presentation,
uh, we get o often asked about, um, the age
of the facilities.
So as you'll see here, uh, ranging from 1881 to City Hall
to 1955 to central fire
and the assessing outbuilding to 1961 for the Hamley School,
67 for police, 65 for the library.
There's many different, um, ages on the facilities.
Um, back then. Of course, a lot has changed back then,
not the least of which it staffing levels, uh,
programming demands, um, building codes, et cetera.
Since these facilities were billed, uh,
there's been a question, why not use Mahoney for housing?
As you've heard, that option, uh, had been considered.
Uh, and the council ultimately decided that, um, uh,
that the Mahoney site would be best suited for, uh,
seeking a consolidated option for, um, city facilities,
which, um, needed work regardless
of whether they're at Mahoney or not.
But the thought was, at the time,
Mahoney could be both convenient, uh,
and cost-effective, as well
as providing more housing options
because it would open up those three other sites.
Uh, we had a question. If the, we've heard people say, oh,
the 194 million is just for City Hall.
We've got all these other buildings that need work too.
Just to clarify that amount, uh,
includes all the buildings we're talking about.
So it combines City Hall Hamlin
and the main library into one.
It would construct a new police station on the Mahoney site,
and it would build a new central fire on site.
So a total of six buildings are impacted.
Um, and I like to note in this, um, uh,
that many department director offices, including my own,
are smaller than they are now in this new proposal.
So there's no bigger offices, there's no gold plating
of desks or anything like that.
Um, which, which we, which we kind of joke about.
But I, you know, I do think it just speaks to the fact that,
um, you know, this was a, there was a lot of work
that went into, um, trying to rightsize, uh, this project.
Uh, there's been a question. How much has the city spend on
design and engineering for this project?
So the council allocated
through a couple different budget processes, $5 million, uh,
total, 500,000 from arpa, 4.5 million from TIF to date.
Uh, about $748,000 has been spent.
That includes that initial work we talked about all the way
back from 2021 to present.
And again, regardless of what solution is identified,
whether, um, uh,
whether it's at Mahoney onsite somewhere else, uh,
any entity that wishes to renovate
or build new cannot avoid spending funds on design work.
So whether we choose Mahoney
or not, you have to have a design that you can present
to a contractor to build.
It's unavoidable. Uh,
do residents need to approve this project?
Yes. To borrow money of this magnitude,
a general obligation bond, go bond is required.
The city charter requires voter approval for any go bond,
and residents will vote in a future bond referendum
tentatively scheduled
for this November if this plan goes forward.
And then finally, is it Mahoney or nothing? Uh, no.
If the council doesn't proceed with this project, or they do
and the voters don't approve a bond for it, all six
of these city facilities in question still have significant
repair, renovation, or new construction needs.
The cost to renovate all the facilities on site, just as
for example, in comparison purposes, has been reviewed
and will be presented later on by, uh, SMRT.
Uh, you heard from Mike the guidance
that's being sought from council tonight,
those two questions.
Um, and you've heard who the speakers are going to be.
So now I'm gonna, I'm gonna turn it over.
You've already heard from Mike Halsey.
I'm gonna turn it over to Craig Piper from SMRT.
Well, thank you. Um, there was a lot there.
I don't feel like everyone needs to take a stretch,
stretch break Now before I present. Um,
Everyone breathe through the nose, out through the nose.
Okay. Well, again, my name's Craig Piper.
Uh, I'm a resident of South Portland.
I've lived here 26 years.
Um, I'm on
many committees through the years,
and, uh, this is a very important project
to me personally as well as professionally.
Uh, let's see. I can get my slides to work.
Um, I think you've heard the, the history of the project,
so I think we don't need to talk about that.
Um, just a reminder of the team, the from SMRT.
Um, we are working, uh, with our partner as, uh,
well, the city's partner, the owner's project manager,
Colliers, which we have CO and Adam here tonight.
Um, SMRT is the design entity is also
engineering focused.
So we have all the components, not just architecture,
interior design, structural engineering,
mechanical engineering, all those components that we brought
to where we are today.
In addition to the SMRT team, we have some key partners
that we have, uh, partnered up with TechCon, who many
of you have potentially met.
Uh, they, uh, are a regional expert, northeast regional
and national expert in public safety building.
So police and fire.
Um, we have Johnson Roberts Associates,
which is an expert in library design, um,
and have completed a number of, uh, significant
renovation in addition libraries, which are very similar
to our project, both in, in Maine and Massachusetts.
Um, we have Sebago picnics, uh,
on the landscape architecture and civil engineering side.
And then another very key partner is PCM,
who is a cost estimator and they're main based
and, um, are familiar with our market.
Um, I believe you've heard the charge of
what we were asked to do.
Um, I don't, I, we weren't sure how we, as, as we said,
we were well scripted,
but we like to make sure we hit at home that the job
of the mc three and our charge is all the elements
that we have talked about.
So it's an important piece to understand.
You've heard all the, um,
and I see many people that have participated
during all our community outreach,
but one of the first steps that we tackle is programming.
And programming is all the parts and pieces of a project.
So, for example, when we talked with the city staff, we met
with all department heads.
We talked about how they work today, their space,
how they use it, not just where they are today
and how much that is, how do they want
to run their department.
And, and also we brought the expertise of
where workplaces are today
and the most efficient way that people work today in, uh,
in, in programming.
That's all the departments.
So all of those, that background gives us the scope
of the project, all the elements of the project.
Um, we had a working group of, uh, city department heads.
We met 15 times over the last six, six months.
Um, as we mentioned that Mahoney City Center did a lot of,
uh, great feedback
and gave us great direction along the way.
We had a, a designer drop-ins, which were virtual, um,
for folks to ask.
Uh, Adam and I, my, I, I apologize
and introduced my colleague at my Adam, others
who is my partner at crime as an architect, um,
and did, um, a lot of the heavy lifting on the project.
And so the designer drop-ins was an opportunity for public
to ask us questions, um, the building crawls,
and then the deep design, deep dive design.
Um, we've also met with many of the, um,
public, uh, safety focus.
So, uh, last week we met and had a meeting on central fire.
Um, as, as you know, the online surveys in, in addition
to all the public outreach, we also went through with Milan
and Public works department,
as any developer in the city would have initial input from
all city departments.
So we, the plans were reviewed at the planning level,
not just department heads.
So programming, I won't bore you with all the details,
but if this is an example,
and you probably can't read it, um,
but it is in the packet
of understanding the square foot of where we are today.
What was evaluated back in 2024 and where we are today.
Uh, the blue is where we are today.
And there's a couple things that are unique.
Um, when we look at net square feet,
if we added every element that we identified
during our programming exercise, we're actually
below square foot.
Then was asked in
2020 2 23.
Um, however, that analysis didn't account for circulation
as much as you would.
Um, so corridors on program space,
and that's a ratio
that's usually applied when you do a program, so that,
as you can see, the blue bars
and the orange line, the, the solid numbers are the net
and the lighter colors are the growth.
So that's just a factor.
And then as we take the program as a Excel sheet, basically
as we start to lay out the building, those efficiencies
that those ratios come together
and we can see how the building can be more efficient or,
or the existing Mahoney actually causes more
circulation than we need.
Um, but generally the overall project is, as you can see,
it's about 130,000 square feet total of
construction square footage, um,
highlighting some of the pieces.
There's about 80 dedicated work workspaces in the
Mahoney, including the library staff.
That's a mix of who the folks are here today.
Some are interns as well as building in some flexibility if,
if things change.
Um, uh, customer service center,
which is a real element of making it clear when you come
for city services, where to go, um, internal work rooms,
break rooms, public work rooms and break rooms.
We understand there's different things there.
Um, one piece,
and I apologize to Kevin, the library director,
I have one bullet item for the library.
There's a whole bunch of components in the library,
which I'll show in the floor plans,
but I don't have broken out here.
And I realize that this afternoon, um, one element
of the program is the library in the gymnasium
or in our future use it potentially is more
of a multipurpose room, is not really square footage
that we program for.
We have it available to us.
So that, so it's why it's a title size, um,
police station breakdown.
Um, uh, public safety
buildings are dramatically different than what is,
uh, the current facility.
These are all the latest
and greatest requirements that police officers need
to follow to do their great work.
Um, the elements that we get asked a lot about
of understanding, we want the building
to be a public facing building and prominence
and make it a very, uh, welcoming
and open space for people to come
and ask questions or if they have issues.
Uh, talk with, uh, uh, folks that are available.
Uh, I'll talk a little bit about the secure yard,
which is the outdoor Sparta police station in the site plan,
and then fire station.
Um, uh, again,
I would recommend if you want more information on the fire
station, listen in
to the presentation we did a couple weeks ago
or last week on the fire station.
But one of the things with the fire station,
the big component is the number of trucks
and the, the, the bays of the trucks.
There's, um, currently four small limited use bays,
and the proposed plan is six, um, right-sized bays
that are flexible for, um, both number of trucks
and the sizes of trucks.
Um, we have spaces for 10 bunks for the firefighters.
It's a firehouse as well as a fire central station.
And so the program in graphic form, um,
this is focusing on Mahoney and the library.
As you can see, um, we are approximately
84,000 square feet of Mahoney,
including an addition of new square footage.
Um, is about 84,000.
The library is about 37% of the project,
and City hall is about 43% of the project.
So then the last remaining 20% is that gym and auditorium.
Um, so you do, you start to understand the project.
Before we put pen to paper, we like to look at elements
that define the project,
and these are elements that are mc three
group developed,
which are our guiding principles, the Project Y.
And we use them to answer questions and make decisions
and would recommend that the council adapt, uh,
and, and look to these guiding principles as well, um,
as we go through the project.
So, community centered design, asking for a lot of feedback.
Um, integrated city functions we're spread out,
bringing folks together, um, sharing, um, elements, uh,
such as the library where it's a public facing element.
And, and combining that with city hall, really, um,
centralizes, uh, all the public faces of, of the city.
And, and in an iconic, memorable Mahoney building, um,
achieve the one climate future goals.
Touch a little bit on that next, um, plan for the future,
but respectful of the past.
We, we are, um, a modern facility.
We are, we're looking forward, we are growing community,
we are changing, evolving.
We need to have, um, a this, the, um, a facility
that serves our needs today, but it has to be flexible.
But we also have to respect the past
and understand we have, um, a example Mahoney building,
and we'll talk a little bit about central fire as well,
that are, are different aspects of respecting the history
and how do we plan that, um, the buildings have to be safe,
accessible, and healthy.
And then with a big price tag, it's even more important.
How do we invest our, our public funds wisely
and make sure that we are thoughtful on that role of,
of port of the project.
Um, just to touch on, uh, one climate future
and how that affects our project.
So, um, it's part of our city's, uh,
resilience and sustainable plan.
So not just energy use,
but resilience, uh, flooding, indentation,
um, sea level rise.
We want to make sure that these
major public infrastructure plate, uh, facilities are in,
uh, those sensitive areas
and make sure that, um, how we stay away from, uh,
um, any sea level rise issues
with the investment that we're placing.
Um, building and energy, waste reduction,
transportation, climate resiliency.
But the big key is to move towards an all electric building
and that that reduces our use on fossil fuel.
We have a great DV array system already invested.
We want to utilize that system.
Um, how we look at, for example,
the newer buildings are gonna be designed
to today's standards of energy, uh, requirements.
And today's energy code with Mahoney building,
it's a little bit of a, uh, it's, we are changing a use
which requires, uh, many code updates,
but also it's really more of a holistical approach.
The more tight we are as a building, more, more insulation,
better windows, it can reduce the size
of the mechanical system.
And we're looking at maybe a geothermal system.
So there's ways that we can reduce the cost
of improving the envelope,
but we may need more equipment to offset
that, those decisions.
So in this early concept phase about energy
and upgrading the facility, we've
erred on the more conservative side
of doing a full energy update
to meet the today's energy code
with a smaller energy system, smaller geothermal system,
because we're having a, but that comes with a price tag.
And we have to look at the lifecycle costs at this early
stage, this concept phase,
we are erring on being conservative.
We can always look forward to scaling
that back and understanding those.
But if our goal, our, our, one of this is the example
of how a a guiding principle, how do we make that decision?
If we're meeting one climate future goals,
we have to follow that path.
If we change that rule
or guideline, that's a different story.
But our plan
and the cost that we have in here meets the,
the one climate future.
Okay, so the,
you were asked sort of to set a baseline for
if we were going to renovate and provide that.
I went through the program of all the new spaces
that we're providing,
what would we do if we didn't have Mahoney?
And we were able, we, we sort of stepping back
and I think the mayor mentioned we're stepping forward.
This is an example of stepping back.
We're saying with all that work
that we've done on the program
and the square footage, what if we were able to
expand the library in place, expand city hall in place,
expand Hamlin in place, please some fire also,
and what are the costs with that?
And there's lots of renovation assumptions and additions
and square footage that we asked our cost estimators.
So they're doing the effort that we've asked.
And then we asked for a separate, um, summary.
One of the pieces with this is,
this is much higher level than the, the level
of effort we did for the Mahoney project.
And if we were looking at these projects
individually, the total project cost would,
or I'm sorry, the construction cost
would be about $108 million.
That is, um,
all done on a square foot per cost basis.
There's no drawings.
It also has limitations on can you actually expand the
library and maintain parking.
Same with City Hall.
We can expand it, but we would have no parking.
So, um, our partners at Colliers plugged in
the total project cost of those renovations.
And I'll do a little deep dive a little bit later in the
presentation on what are called soft costs.
So there's instruction costs and soft costs.
So if you add in all those costs
to do a multi-year multi renovation project,
it's $153 million.
So that construction cost is one number, soft cost and,
and a little bit of escalation, which I'll also mention.
So as a baseline Program, proposed program
at Mahoney, proposed program at existing facilities,
it's 153 million.
So back to Mahoney. Sorry, Craig,
Could you just land on that?
I'm not sure everybody would've had a chance to see that.
It went by kind of quick. Alright.
And it's 0.6, so that to me is 1 54. Okay.
Alright, thanks. After your water, please continue.
Okay. So the task at hand and the work that the mc three
and the working group.
Um, when we look at the site,
we looked at all the components of the Mahoney site,
how we get there, the orientation, solar orientation,
cold winter winds, um, traffic, um,
connection to Mill Creek Park, the school,
and the current library site.
But understanding this is truly the, the goal
of being the hub of South Portland and all the,
and as well as the fire station.
Um, just for those who don't, haven't been living
and breathing Mahoney in, in, um, every day.
Um, this is an aerial view.
We have Broadway on the left
and, um, ocean on the, on the lower part,
and then Highland is coming through.
Yeah. Um, Mahoney, uh,
footprint here, and again, when it was a school,
there was a different uses of
with the parking and entrances.
Um, but our proposed plan is
Most likely when we're at a concept level, I want everyone
to understand this is enough to provide a price.
Layouts can change, components can change,
but this was what we heard through feedback, um,
at different orientations.
And I guess what I will walk through is I'll wear the hat
of, I'm coming to city hall, so Mahoney is on the left.
The new public safety building is on the right,
but we'll stay with the Mahoney.
So the idea is we're creating a, uh,
entrance off of Ocean with the goal
of removing all parking
on the Ocean Street side
and moving the parking to the rear of the site.
And parking is a hot button.
We've heard that over and over again
of having too much parking.
Um, but when you start to go through the spaces,
the library, the, um, uh, city hall services,
and then for example, if the existing gym
or, uh, community space,
however we want to use it,
what if it becomes a polling facility?
We want to make sure that we have a open library,
an open city hall,
and make sure that folks had the ability
to come and, and vote.
So parking is a, is a big element of the site.
Um, so there's an entrance off of Ocean
to access the parking.
We have what we're identifying here as
somewhat short term parking for, for, uh, for discussion
of quick services to city Hall with the entrance
for city hall here.
The library entrance would be here,
where the library parking generically is back here.
And then the police station,
and I'll, I'll go a little bit into deeper there.
Um, we also have a little open space
and we have some scenarios we'll talk about that as well.
Um, there is a new connection to
Highland in this plan.
Um, with police.
There's a concern of where, um, the folks,
if there is an emergency response,
how they can find different ways to, to, to respond.
Um, so the idea of having an entrance
that's discreet on island as well
as we maintain the entrance to Broadway,
but it's three, uh, main entrances and exits.
Um, the idea of this sort of pink area, it's,
um, if we want to think of for those familiar
with Portland City Hall, having the front steps, the sort
of the public convening area of city hall
and creating, not as grand as Portland City Hall,
but an area for gatherings, events, celebrations,
um, in the, the area at the front of the Oceanside.
Um, we have, uh, I'll go into the floor clans in a bit,
but this is an addition in the u shape of Mahoney for,
it's a one story edition for the library.
We'll go into detail there.
Um, police area, just a,
a few key pieces is the, the
new police station is two stories.
Mahoney is three stories with an attic,
and the three stories are actually very
tall floor to floors.
Um, so the public safety building creates a, a,
a Ford facing similar face to Ocean Street
and a two story, uh, the, uh, site area.
This is a secure lot.
So there's a fence around, provides an area
for covered parking for police vehicles.
And the idea with
that is we invest in these police cars and providing cover
and sit and, and maintenance
and making sure that they last long.
And it also makes it easier for emergency, um,
for the police officers.
Um, maintenance facility and storage is in this area.
This is just a one story facility.
And then there is what's called a Sally port.
So a sally port is a secure entrance for any,
uh, transfer for privacy, safety, security.
Someone's having a tough day.
Um, it's, uh, a way to transfer the individual
in a safe mode.
So that's a, a new feature
that the existing facility does not have.
Uh, couple things I mentioned, sea level rise and,
and the inundation, if we utilize the worst case plan of
that 8.8, um, that's an elevation that
snakes kind of through the site along this run here.
So the parking area is in the inundation area.
The proposed buildings are, or proposed buildings
and Mahoney are outside of that.
The proposed police station does not have a basement.
So it's only a one or first floor.
And the second floor a Mahoney does have in a basement.
And that basement amount is slightly below
the inundation level.
Okay. Um, the area to the right
is a, is a, uh, open space.
'cause we heard there was an, uh, concern for open space
and some activity space.
So we have some options of what this could be.
It could be a very passive area just left on lawn
for gatherings, extension of, of art in the park.
Um, other events.
Or it could be more designed, more active.
For example, a a basketball court, um, tennis courts and
or a small mini soccer field.
Um, which would be, you know, it's a small field,
but it, it could, uh, if be of interest.
But for clarity, when we did a cost estimate, we kept,
it's just an open space.
We didn't plan those options.
'cause it's, it could always be those in the future.
It doesn't have to be day one.
And those, those are sort of things that are sprinkled
through the project that we made, assumptions
and allowances that as we go further,
if the council chooses, we want to iron out those decisions
and assumptions that the collective team
have made along the way.
Okay. Fire, uh, public safety site,
current police and fire.
Um, as, as we all know, you can see, um,
and I think Scott mentioned that the year is built,
the original fire station is here
and the original police station is here.
And there was an addition in 2000
that connected the two buildings
and has a, uh, a basement that has flooding issues.
Um, one of the things that we, uh,
I think on the agenda you may be discussing the historical,
um, side of the central fire station.
Um, we all, I, I shouldn't say we, I have a
affinity to the design of this building
and it's certainly a landmark in our community.
Um, however, um, designing for a new public safety, it is,
um, very outdated.
And so our proposal in the project
is looking at the idea of demolishing the building,
working with the fire department and the team there.
Everyone has a concern with that.
Um, but as we can't, we could not figure out a way
to keep the building
and also be cost conscious.
Um, because once police is vacated, we can,
we can really reconfigure the site to the best function
for the fire station.
As I mentioned, it's a larger, the bays on the, uh,
sorry, start again.
So just to get you oriented, so, um, the gas station,
the old armory is here.
The, this area in dash is the
front facing apparatus, bay and tower.
And as you one, one item to note,
and let's go back to the site plan.
This is a, what we call a backend, um, apparatus bay.
So trucks have to use Broadway to back up into the,
the garage, which we've all experienced at times,
um, passing by.
Um, so one of the goals of
a clear fire station is to have a drive through bay.
So we would en the trucks would enter off of an point
park and then exit.
This also allows us to, um,
address resiliency in raising the height of the fire station
for sea level rise, the apron,
that is the ability to back the trucks up.
It gives us a longer run to provide that, uh, correct pitch
for the fire trucks.
Uh, let's see, um, training building as well.
Um, the other key component is we've really separated this,
the, the gas station entrance from the police and fire,
or I'm sorry, the new central fire station.
Um, there's a shared driveway today,
but this basically eliminates that set set up
and we keep the access on Broadway,
which is the fastest re response time,
which is the most important for our fire fighters
to get across to the east side, west side,
or across the bridge if, if they, they need to.
Okay. So Mahoney, um, just a brief, um,
understanding of the, when we talk about the floors
of Mahoney, for example, there's ground floor,
second floor, third floor.
We also have, here's an historic photo
that really tells the, um,
the different look of the building.
The original building was, um, more
of a green color windows, where today it's green.
Um, but just to orient you, most of the building
is, uh, has natural light.
So the ground floor, second floor and third floor.
And the basement is really,
the basement area is only the gym.
The rest of the building is, has access to natural light.
The gym today has natural light through
from the walking track.
For those of you remember, there's a walking track on top.
And then just to look at the rest of the building,
you can see this whole level here.
It's not at grade as you enter the building and go down,
but it has natural light.
So as we go through the floors, I just wanted
to make sure everyone understood
that there's different levels of the building.
And um, Mike mentioned the mc three was charged
with those three scenarios.
Um, we evaluated
or we move forward, option one, which we'll share today.
So now we're looking at floor plans.
Um, this is the existing gymnasium on the lower level.
Part of the issue with our multiple levels in this building,
we have to, in, there's no elevator in the building today,
so we're introducing elevators.
And so laying out that program
that we've already identified in the building
and making sure those elevators are used for folks.
So if we have the gymnasium
or the community room as a polling place, we have
to provide access for everyone.
So there's some elevators here on
that lower level as we go up.
The new addition is in this red area,
the u-shaped part of the building.
And if we take away that, um, this is the floor
where the library takes up the majority of the floor.
Um, so we have the new construction, we have the addition.
We're utilizing the existing corridors.
'cause the existing corridor walls have, are,
are all bearing wall.
This is a masonry bearing construction building.
So all the, those wall school officer, were keeping those,
but we're renovating
and, um, modifying all the old classrooms, um,
spaces, but using that width from the exterior wall,
that interior corridor.
Um, and for example, the library entrance
here, the city hall entrance here.
But making sure that no matter which entrance you came in
the building, it's clear on where you're going.
And it's not, oh, I came in the wrong door
and I have to walk all the way around.
We wanna make sure that the entrances are connected.
We also are looking at the ability
of having the entrances be at grade
as you enter the building.
And then you transfer either up or down.
We don't today, there's ramps outside or stairs.
We're looking at, um, having those be at grade
and then the transition where folks need to move up
and down happens inside.
So again, there's four elevators in this building
because of the number of the, um, entrances
and the functions that we're, we're looking at.
Um, one last piece just
or one piece to mention, which I should have mentioned.
Um, the preservation committee for Mahoney asked us to,
uh, maintain the elevation along Broadway and Ocean.
So where we have new modifications to the building from,
um, entrances is on, not on those faces
that the, the, the committee asked us to.
So it's more in the back and on the side.
Um, as we go up, this is now the,
what we call the second floor.
This is where, so again, remember multilevel.
So where you come in, sometimes it's a half floor to go
to the second floor and it's a half floor to go
to the ground floor.
So when we say second floor, it's really
half up from from grade.
The idea of having a customer service center,
public meeting rooms.
Um, and there's also the ability
and in the construction cost estimates of a rooftop garden
and the rooftop garden be, could be, uh, just a way
to offset heat island, uh, by providing green space
or it can be also an active space that people go out on.
It could be a look only
or a go out on as a way for staff to take a break
or as part of the library visit, you could also go here.
So these are mostly, um, city hall services on this level
with the theater, the main lower floor of the theater
with new restrooms, circulation.
And we had to also look at the floor plan in separating
that if a theater event happens when city hall
is closed or vice versa.
Wanted to make sure we had flexibility in the building.
Um, going up to the third floor, again, more city services.
These are just showing that that program in Excel form fits
in a two dimensional floor plan.
Um, more shared conference rooms, public conference rooms,
as well as city council chambers in the
lower right hand corner.
Okay. Police station,
I probably should pick up the pace, I apologize.
Um, but just wanted to, I guess part of this is
to really share the level of detail
that the cost estimates were based on.
Um, there's a lot of work that has been done here.
Um, so here's the two story, uh,
or the first floor of the two story police station
with a public entrance here
and a community training room here.
So it's also a community event space
and the Sally port as I mentioned.
And then other areas for detectives
and other areas of the,
the project fire station.
Um, here's the, the first floor of the fire station.
We have the apparatus bays, we have, um, new bays
that are drive through.
And then one bay that is just a pull in
for smaller vehicles.
We have all the separation for firefighter safety from
where they live and where they work.
Um, and again, a lot
of detail on the fire station presentation last week.
Um, and the sleep areas, um, with their day room, um,
and other functions.
One of the ideas, um, that to, to
reference the old fire station is to look at elements
of the old building that are practical and,
and where we can replicate.
So for example, the apparatus bays that we have today,
the garage doors are arched arch with some features.
We can certainly replicate those.
We won't, it won't be an exact copy,
but there's elements that we can take and recreate.
We have a power that has the flagpole.
Those are different elements that we can certainly look at,
but at this level it's really just a floor plan
concept, floor plan.
Okay. Concept design report is a
140 page document that breaks down all the components
of the project for the cost estimator and the team.
This describes all the materials
that we're putting in the building infrastructure
and, um, upgrades.
I mentioned the breakdown between hard cost and soft cost.
So hard cost is what the construction costs of the project,
what the contractor will be building.
Soft costs are the elements of land
purchase, but in our case, we don't have
to purchase any land design procurement, uh,
cost designer fees, surveys, buying all the furniture,
um, infrastructure, it, financial fees, insurance,
project contingency, moving relocation fees and escalation.
Escalation is the cost of when you build something,
when you estimate you think you're gonna build if,
if we're estimating in today's dollars.
But we have to think that we're not building today.
We're building out two and three years.
And our partners, um, uh, we have a breakdown of those
and soft cost ratio between construction
and, um, the soft cost is usually 30 to 35%.
Um, our cost estimate, we had a 40 page detail
of all the elements.
This is just an example
and when we looked at the breakdown of cost estimates,
we have Mahoney, we have the three options.
We had Mahoney with just the, the actual site component
because it's, they're shared between the projects police
and then the fire, uh, central fire
includes site development costs.
So just, it's a little unique,
but, um, Mahoney development costs,
it was the old dump.
There's very poor soils.
We have to spend quite a bit of money to prepare the site,
um, and also support the new police station
and the addition for the library.
Um, we have, um, park, uh, parking is,
as I mentioned, we have quite a bit of parking,
but also, you know, when you have a lot of parking, you have
to maintain and provide the storm water requirements,
which are also costly, which, um, is part
of the project number of elevators.
Um, we talked a little bit about envelope improvements.
And again, we in the estimate is providing a whole new
insulation around the perimeter, new windows, new roof.
Um, and as we work further,
we can define whether those elements are all
needed at this time.
Um, auditorium
and theater, there's, there could have been two tags
that we could have taken as, as sort of mock fall,
leave it alone, don't touch it.
Um, but we wanted to be, make sure that in order
to use the spaces they have to be brought up
to the same level as the rest of the building.
So there are some improvements.
Um, and renovating a theater can be very,
can be a big gap.
And we targeted the lower end
that we're just doing life safety
and features for, you know, um, accessible seating
and a handful of new seating lights
and, um, airflow and life safety.
Um, maintaining the historic features,
but also repairing a lot of the exterior of the building.
'cause once we invest all this money,
we wanna make sure the exterior
of the building is at the same level.
That is also included in the estimate.
Um, with new construction, it's a little more predictable.
Um, however, as I mentioned,
we do have the poor soils and the fire station.
We have the, you know, the whole cost of
building up the site to, uh, provide the, the, uh,
resiliency, but also the demolition
and the idea that we want to put back features
of the old fire station.
So there's some costs that we've included.
This is the detailed summary of those three options.
And as we break down,
I apologize, pause for a moment.
The option one, option two, and option three.
You heard, we presented to the MC three group
and the option one, which was the 70 million
for just Mahoney,
with the library services all at one floor.
So each of the projects components
we have, I think I'm almost there.
I'm gonna make it 70 million for City Hall.
Mahoney is about 14 million just in site improvements.
Police station component is 27 million.
And then fire station, which includes the cost for site,
is 32 million.
Okay, So our partners at Collier
ran the numbers for all the soft costs of the project.
And as we know, we're at that $193 million.
One element of their estimate is to pick a schedule, we have
to tie it to how we're gonna build it.
And this, there was different ways that we could,
we could design one part, wait,
and then build it and go onto the next.
The cost estimate is based on a maho. It's a Mahoney focus.
First, we, we design, we build Mahoney
and police station all in one,
and then we switch to designing
and building fire station at a later date.
As you can see, there's lots of iterations,
but that was the, the one that had the shortest duration,
which would help in escalation costs.
So escalation costs briefly.
As I said, cost estimate was based on today's dollars.
If we were building it today, we have to plan that,
what that cost will be.
And there's ratios and percentages that change over time.
And for example,
a a five year based project at 4% annual escalation
would cost 20% more than what we're, uh,
estimating today.
So adding all those together, um,
that is the bad number for comparison.
Um, cost per square foot, it's a very dangerous
to compare project, um, project.
But there's a similar project in Albany, New York
that's under construction now.
And one of our local partners in Sigley is
actually building that project.
And we reached out to them
because it's, it's almost the same project for us.
And they came in at about $628 a square feet,
which was two years ago now.
So we're generally in the same square, uh,
cost per square foot.
We also have a new, new addition
where they don't have a new addition.
Um, libraries, again, we've looked at a number
of different blend of new construction and renovation.
It's hard, again, I caution you when we do these
comparables, but just to understand where our project falls
with others, um, there's a big range in libraries
as well as a high range.
And we were, um, coming in slightly under that high range.
Um, we looked at police stations similar, we're right in
what we would expect.
And then fire stations, um, also, uh,
generally pretty similar.
And as I said, most
of the fire stations in this summary did not include
the site cost.
So ours include site cost.
So it's a little, uh, uh,
feel good about the fire station numbers.
Okay, so where do we go from here?
We have scope, schedule, and budget.
Any of those change, it changes the ratio of the project.
If we wanted to increase the scope, I doubt
that's on the table today.
Um, it would be a higher cost and a longer schedule.
We want to shorten the schedule.
It could also be a higher cost
or we would have to reduce scope.
Or if we want to reduce the budget, we have to reduce scope
and also evaluate the schedule.
All right, so almost there. Almost there. I promise.
So where we are in the project, so there's concept design,
which we just completed.
This is that green line, and that's a plus
or minus 5% of the design process.
Um, the charge of the council was to get to 70% design
before you go to a referendum.
And I don't, we are not gonna achieve
that as part of your charge.
And in some ways I feel as a resident,
I'll wear my resident hat.
We don't wanna spend a lot
of design time without knowing this is a real project.
So in some ways, we've done a lot of work.
I hope the committee sees that we've done our due diligence.
We have some numbers there.
They're high numbers, I understand.
Um, but I don't see us going to 70% design
before the voters have a say.
However, there is work that we can do
to refine the number if the council chooses to get to
that next phase, which is called schematic design,
which is about 20% of a project.
So not full 70, but about 20%.
Um, I won't re re review our guiding principles,
but again, use these in your, your discussions.
Um, I think of all the benefits of the project,
I think the, the last one that we can't lose sight of is
that it allows for the vacant properties to be repurposed
for other needs in the community.
The city hall site, the assessor, well, city hall
and assessors on the same site.
Hamlin and library.
Um, I think you have your questions,
but from the design team, if you were going
to wear your design team hat, we need
definition of where we're going.
And if there is a budget that we're trying to target,
we can come back and tell you what that target is.
We, we, um, so we're,
we need direction just as everyone else does.
Um, and I believe that's it for me, sorry for
the extended discussion,
but I hopefully it was thorough that everyone public, uh,
understands where we are. Thank you.
Thank you so much, Craig. Thank you.
I think we all have certainly learned a lot.
One quick question. Um, is Craig's presentation right now
attached to the Mahoney section of our website
or will that happen soon?
Yes, it can happen soon. There's Okay.
The board, the board docs had a presentation.
Yes, it's, yeah,
but I, I just want you to knows part
of board, yeah, this is different.
I can't tell who's speaking.
Probably you're not supposed to be, but okay.
It seems like it would be a good idea if we can
to put it on the website.
Um, and then the other thing I wanted
to mention is the fire station presentation
that was last Monday, um, is currently uh,
um, SBC TV did um, film that.
And so you can watch that.
Alright, I'd love to tell you all,
we're at the seventh inning stretch,
but I don't really think we are yet.
So I think counsel, I know you have questions for Craig,
or I think you might have some questions for Craig,
but I think we need to bring Ellen forward right now.
This was the first time.
That's all I need.
Uh, Okay. I am Ellen Sanborn.
I'm the finance director for, um, the city of South Portland
and the, a member of the M three C committee.
And as part of one of the first acts of M three C committee,
they established a funding subcommittee.
Um, which included, as you can see up there, it was Mike ey,
Brian Clark, Josh Renny, Phil Salberg,
Kevin Davis, and myself.
Um, we met twice since we were appointed
and went through a number of items.
There's the report that's in your packet,
these are just bullets for that.
Um, so people can just follow along.
But we went through, um, a number
of potential funding sources
that could help pay for this project.
And I'll say upfront, most of these would help
pay debt service on bonds.
It's not necessarily we'll get a lot of money up front
and then could reduce the 194,000 up front.
Um, and you'll see as I go through this, why that is
so Forest General obligation bonds
probably a main funding source for the project
would be issued for up to 30 years.
Debt service, primarily property taxes.
Um, and other funding sources,
like I said, could be used to reduce it.
The important thing, as Craig was alluding to
and some other folks have sort of mentioned is the phasing
of the project would also impact this.
So it's important to understand that the estimates
and the things we've put out recently about the impact on
tax rate is the just upfront assumption
that we borrow 140 $94 million tomorrow
and pay it off over 30 years.
Not likely to happen.
Um, folks should understand if you approve a referendum
for a certain amount of money depending on the project,
and if the money is built over multiple years,
you wouldn't necessarily borrow that money at the beginning.
You would borrow it in phases as you need the money.
So, um, depending on the phasing of the project,
that could look very different, um, over a course
of a course of time.
So a lot of people talk about grant funding.
Um, the city certainly receives a lot
of grant funding for a lot of things.
The um, issue with grant funding
for this project is federal grants have a grant period,
an application period, and they have cycles.
Um, before the referendum, it wouldn't be likely
that we would have a project
that we could present in a cycle
that would actually receive approval for funding.
And just to note,
the federal fiscal year is a
different fiscal year than ours.
They start in October and run through September.
And that influences, um, a lot of
how grant application process works.
It does require some detail.
If you wanna apply for a federal grant, they want to know
what you're gonna spend the money on,
not just a concept plan.
They're gonna wanna see details
and specific to the grant that you are applying for.
Um, usually in my own experience,
and I think a lot of other folks that I work with,
and even if you look online
and you start going through all the multiple types
of grant programs, there are not just grant programs
to build a city hall.
They don't typically do that.
They're always tied to a specific outcome or a service.
Or you can buy equipment or you can provide social services
or you can do those kinds of things,
but it's not for the infrastructure of buildings typically.
So it's a challenge to think that we would get a lot
of money towards just the construction renovation, um,
of Mahoney and even for police and fire.
Um, there are energy grants available.
We've talked a lot about that.
And when Craig was referring to the one climate future, um,
geothermal part of this project, um,
however you gotta build it and get reimbursed.
And we just got money back recently, last fall for, um,
the school department project, the middle school project,
they applied 'cause they have geo geothermal,
it took over a year to get that money back from the IRS.
It was quite a process. Um, so in that case, as I mentioned,
that could be used to, um, reduce the debt service
that you pay over those years.
But it is not something we can apply
to the upfront cost of the project.
Um, and I mentioned state grants here
because a lot of people think, well, the state can just pay.
A lot of grants you get from the state are not
necessarily state funded.
They're federal grants that go through the state
as the organization who divvies it out
to other places are a lot of our road grants for FHWA
and things like that, they come through the main
DOT, but they're actually federal funds.
So a lot of potential state grants are actually federal
funding and from the programs that do that
that I was describing before tax credit.
So we had a brief conversation about this,
the city doesn't pay income tax,
so tax credits are not something
that we would take advantage of or be eligible for.
Um, we did talk a little bit about we could,
you know, contract with someone to renovate the building
for us and just live there as a tenant over a hundred years
or whatever it is in order for them to take advantage of it.
Um, the subcommittee did not believe that the public
or the council would be interested in
not owning our own building
and losing the control over that property that way.
So we didn't spend a lot of time talking about it.
Um, but we did, we did kick it around a little bit.
Fundraising is another one.
So we talked a lot about fundraising.
Um, there is potential for the library,
the auditorium theater or maybe the outdoor spaces.
Um, it was kind of the consensus of the subcommittee that
we'd love it, but we're not sure we'd get somebody
to give us a lot of money to build city hall.
Um, but kind of like
with grants, you have to have a project.
You gotta have something to show people
to incite them about giving money.
Um, and there was consideration of the committee
that it would require professional fundraising like you
for this, a project this size, you want somebody
who does this, who knows where you know the pockets are
and knows what people are interested in, can help
with the design to say, if you do this,
I think I can get you money for that.
Any of you that have lived through any
of those capital campaigns, um, probably understands that.
Um, but again, you can have pledges,
but those don't necessarily reduce the 194 million ask.
It will come after the fact to say, well,
that will go towards the debt service in the future,
depending on how those things lay out.
Uh, auditorium gym, we did talk about, well,
we could lease it out for private use
and for somebody to run it and pay us rent.
Um, there are models like that
where you could just carve out those things
and have somebody run it and rent it
and take care of it and just pay us money.
Um, just cautionary is general obligation.
Bonds are tax exempt.
Anybody that owns any of those bonds knows
that from the income you get from them.
And because of that, there are a lot of rules and,
and calculations about private use of a building
or anything that's built with tax exempt bonds.
And there are thresholds at which they then become taxable.
Not insurmountable, but I,
but tax exempt bonds, um, have a better interest rate
because they are tax exempt.
So we pay less interest on those.
If you get into a revenue bond
or um, a taxable bond, it's a higher interest rate.
So that's just, it's a little thing.
I don't know what that would look like in this building.
There's talk also about, you know, do we
have a cafeteria at lease that out to somebody to have that
for the, for the building and lots of those things.
Um, could also impact the building
design as Craig had mentioned.
And depending on who takes that space over,
what is it gonna look like, what are they gonna require in
order to make it a rentable
and usable space full time basically.
Um, and how the other spaces around it are used.
And we would not know that probably until
after referendum if we wanted to pursue that.
'cause you'd have to work with whoever wanted to lease
that space to figure out how to design it.
We had talk about naming rights.
Um, so there's examples in the state of Maine
of public buildings that are named after somebody.
There's fields named, there's all kinds of those.
It's, it's a potential thing that we could do.
Um, we talked with Brandon legal counsel.
He said there are no restrictions that he knows of
that would prevent the council from wanting to do that.
He did say if it's something you wanna pursue,
he would recommend, um, doing a formal policy
about it beforehand
and it could apply to anything now or in the future.
If that's something you're interested
in, I'm sure he can help you with that.
Tax increment financing.
So we have a number of tiffs, um, in the city that have
provided a lot of funding to us over the years.
Um, the new, um, revisions to the law recently would allow
use of TIFF money for administrative buildings or town halls
or whatever the word is.
Um, and we've now amended a couple of TIFs
to include that language.
Um, one of our challenges is two
of our largest TIFs have expired
or will expire that have generated the most revenue We are
using, as Scott said in the beginning, um, a chunk of
that TIF money's been appropriated
for the engineering design work for this project already.
Depending on where that goes, um, it'll either be used for
that or used for something else.
But, um, there is a lot of money that we've programmed
to be used to pay for that so
that it is not on the tax rate.
Um, any potential new TIF districts could help.
So we start the project
or we get a new TIF district that has fees
or, uh, revenue that we want
to pledge towards the debt service of this project.
That could certainly happen. Um,
and it could help pay construction costs.
But currently we don't have anything that would
impact this very much as far as the amount of money
that we have to put towards it.
Again, new TIF district comes on a couple years.
There's a lot of money you could pay down the debt.
You could do something that you would set aside to do later,
like build out the field.
Um, things like that.
So there's options sale of the properties
that we currently own.
Um, the expectation would be if we consolidate that all
of those properties that have been mentioned
before would be available, um, for other uses.
And there are multiple things that could be done with those.
Um, the real challenges, we'd have to be outta the building
before we could sell it.
So again, we gotta move in
and then sell the billing after the fact.
So we would, again, could pledge
that revenue towards the debt service, um, the tax revenue
that comes from these properties potentially becoming
taxable and private use could be used for that.
Could certainly all great options.
Um, kind of depends on what the council
and public wants at the time
that these buildings are vacated.
It could be, could be anything, could be housing,
could be we wanna park, could be we're gonna sell it.
Get as much as we can and pay off the debt
at the Mahoney facility.
So it is possible.
Um, local option sales tax,
in my opinion, is the best option to get a lot of money
other than the fact that it,
it does not seem popular in Augusta.
Um, and it's not currently law allowed under main law for us
to be able to come up
with our own taxes and charge 'em to people.
So it would need legislative
change in order for that to happen.
So the conclusion
of the subcommittee was bonds would be
the primary funding source.
There are the tools that could reduce the impact, um,
as we've just gone over.
And that many funding options will depend on project design,
legal review, future sale, and local decisions.
Um, but again, all of this would be primarily
after the referendum
because it would just be funding that we could stream in
to help pay off the, the debt in the future.
So that's it. Um,
there is a slide which you're not gonna be able to see.
Well that is in the, I think it's,
it'll be online or it's in the deco, whatever.
It's um, during the budget process, we,
we publish a form of average.
The average, uh, value of a residential property,
and this was from this last budget process is 514,000.
And then we do a few scenarios on either side with
what the impact on the tax rate would be.
If, as I said in the beginning,
we take the 194 million we borrowed all at once
and next year everybody's taxes get hit.
So the tax rate right now is 1365.
It would be $2 and 26 cents more with
that debt in the first year.
And then the scenarios that people can pick through is with
or without homestead exemption, um,
what the impact would be on those valleys of homes.
And that's what I got.
Thanks Ellen. Just a quick clarification, um,
because people don't hear this language all the time when
you, every time you say reduce debt service.
Yes. Reducing debt service has an impact on reducing the
burden on taxpayers.
Correct. Just wanna make sure that that is well
Understood. Thank Right. So
just to, just to explain that.
So when we borrow money, there's just like a mortgage,
you have to pay it off over time.
That payment is in our budget every year to pay it off.
And so if we borrow this money,
the next year's payment would have to be in the budget
and that's the impact that it would have to the tax rate.
Okay. So, um,
I was joking about the seventh inning stretch,
but I would say since we've all been mostly sitting
for 90 minutes, um, anyone who wants to stand up
and wiggle is welcome to do that.
Just don't hit your neighbor. Um, and don't be embarrassed.
And, um, it is now time for us to move
to our counselor's questions.
Also, if you came in later
after our counselors ask questions,
then we will have public comments
and public comment
for a workshop is only on the workshop item.
We do not have open public comment at the workshops.
Alright, counselors, who wants
to lead us off with any questions?
Have you been stunned into silence?
There's a first time for everything. Counselor West, please.
Um, my questions are for Mr. Piper
because I'm trying to get a handle on the cost of the,
the new building for the library.
And I do, I noticed it seemed to be an inconsistency in,
so one, you put up a slide that said 12,000 square feet
of new, but in the documents that are, um, attached
to the, to the item,
it's document 2 6 0 1 1 3 on page 30
it says the library edition is 17,820 square feet.
So I just calling your attention to that. Okay? Yes.
Uh, does it, does,
isn't the 17,000 the more accurate number?
It's hard to Is that just
The new edition piece?
Okay. Yeah, just the new edition piece. Yeah.
So then it's, uh,
and then the same document says
that we're using $771 a square foot for your,
our general for item for, um, number one, version one.
So when, when you multiply those two together,
that comes out to 13.7 million just for the new
construction area.
Does that sound like a reasonable number what you're,
or is there a number that you're using
for the new construction for the library?
So, um, as part of our effort,
we did not ask the breakout mm-hmm.
Individual areas. It was, this was the project.
We can certainly do that
to get a better understanding of each component,
But just, uh, so, but just for purposes of tonight,
if I take the 771 times the 17 8 20
and it comes out to 13.7 million, that's more,
that's approximate for the,
what the cost would be for that part of the building.
For the yes. For the addition.
And then I noticed in the, yeah, just for the addition,
I noticed in the, um, summary of numbers
that had $900,000 for the
tile on the rooftop garden.
So that's, the rooftop garden adds extra
costs that are probably above.
Correct. Okay, thanks.
It's almost another million
for the just the rooftop garden, huh? Is that correct?
Yeah, I mean, again, it was to address a number of things,
the heat island of having another roof
to provide some green space.
The other I idea was that would provide, um, safe spaces
above the parking areas for any, for city staff and public.
Again, all in the spirit of nice to have must have,
we made the assumption that we wanted to, uh, that the
feedback we heard was
that would be a great amenity for our community. Yeah.
Well, I'll save all my thank yous to everybody
for when I really talk,
but those are my questions for right now.
Thank you.
Thank you counselor.
Scott. Well, I should say when, well since,
since you're up, I might as well, is that okay to some
Questions? Please. I'm hoping we'll ask
questions
Bring up, um, I don't know.
Thank you so much for the presentation and all the work.
Um, I don't know if you have these numbers,
but I also was curious about the sort of library
costs being separate from sort of a city services component.
And it sounds like there's some estimates
that Natalie pulled together,
but I think that that those two numbers I think would be
very helpful to have if it's possible to kind
of tease that out.
Yeah, so it's a great question
and I, um, all the elements,
it's easy with the police and fire.
They're separate buildings.
When it's all combined,
there's things get mixed and matched.
But the rent, so for example, when we look at the library,
um, the square footage of new addition
and renovation, whether it's 50 50
or not, you know, there are, there are spaces
that we're utilizing for library in existing space,
quite a bit of space as well as the hallway space
and that hallway space is there
and we are going to use it for library space if possible.
And so it's kind of a blended question of is it
how much renovation are we doing in a,
in a 12 foot wide quarter that has lockers in it,
but for a library there may be features that we can utilize
so it's counted to the renovation
square footage of the library.
Sorry, I'm answering your question.
I'm answering everyone, but, um, we can break out,
we just don't have that information broken out today
of the library component for the rest of it.
And, and it, we could also do the theater improvements
to understand that component of
what dollars are going into that component.
We can break out, we just don't have, that wasn't the charge
of breaking out the numbers.
We had a project number,
but we can do more breakdown if
that's helpful for the council.
I think the other question that I had in terms
of breakdown was trying to understand the cost
to bring the building up to code
and various code elements to change the use as opposed
to taking it to the next level of upgrading the building
to the actual use, you know, walls, offices, et cetera.
Right. And I don't know if that's, or
or even just understanding the elements that are required
to bring it up to code
before you then go into the renovations
to make it a useful space for the new use.
Right, right. Yeah.
Um, uh, maybe to insert it slightly different,
I think, um, a lot of the, um,
I I'll say my goal as well as others had hoped that
reusing Mahoney would be a cost benefit.
Um, but as we dug into deeper, there's a lot of
that building that is not, um,
easily converted to current occupied space.
And with the change of use there lots of triggers, um,
how much renovation we do
or alteration we do kicks you into different criteria.
So if we were just going in and moving people in
and not actually doing anything, you don't have to bring
as much of the building up to speed.
But in order to fit these programs
and make a efficient government building, we have
to do quite a bit of renovations
and that triggers, there's lots
of gates in the code requirements that gets us
to different levels of renovation.
I mentioned a little bit about the envelope as one element,
but we also have structural issues.
The, the building is an unreinforced
bearing wall masonry building.
And if you were building that building today, it has
to be what's called a reinforced masonry bearing wall.
And that means that we have
to add steel within that structure.
If you imagine adding steel
or reinforcement throughout that whole building,
that's a lot of renovations.
We also have footings in a, um, building that,
um, we don't know, its bearing capacity to
have all these additions in renovations being used
differently than it was designed in 1925.
So we need to do some testing of the foundations
to make sure that the building can support those
reinforcement changes that goes
with more study and more details.
But we have the worst case in there
because at this point it's our due diligence to make sure
that we have those costs included as the,
as all those worries
until we can pull them out as not worries.
Right now I'm very worried and I want to sleep at night.
So they're in there, uh, elevators
for accessibility. Yes. Right. I
Think that's, I mean that's sort of the
Right and elevators, fire alarms, sprinklers,
all those elements that are not up to today's standard
and for our future use.
Do you mind if I go for it?
Number three, here it comes, um, number three out of
how many, um, I'll try to consolidate.
Um, I wonder, again, I don't think there's an answer
to this, but I'm, I'm curious about the parking needs again
for sort of city use
and offices versus library versus auditorium, gym,
polling station, et cetera.
And, um, again, just trying
to think about the various components and,
and in the, in the structure of the costs, sort of what,
what parts we may be able to actually bite off
and chew mm-hmm. As opposed to the
Full project. Yeah, we,
um, Milan, we talked a little bit about we have
to prove that we have the cart per planning in our zoning.
We have to prove, we have the parking for our development
and, and or a strategy on offsetting that demand.
Um, we have some unique features that a building
of this use will have obviously a DA accessible spaces
that are significantly more than what would be there
for the li uh, the school.
We also have fleet vehicles for city workers that need
to be located on site as well
as their own vehicles if they do drive.
Um, so there's a,
it's a complex algorithm for parking.
What our drawings show is sort of the maximum build out
of the site and as a, as an approach, again,
or conservative, which means having more parking
requires more storm water retention, which also adds to,
so I mentioned some of those earlier.
But parking is a, is one of the items that we have
to get a handle on of not overbuilding hitting
that sweet spot of, of making sure
that there are spaces available for when
nothing would be worse with your taxes raising, going
to city hall and not having a place to park, heaven forbid.
I can imagine that we would hear that.
But we also want to encourage other ways to get there.
Hence, you know, um, creating opportunities for the, uh,
bus system to have easier drop off
and say drop off near Mahoney.
We have bus stations there.
We also want to utilize the, um, the greenway for bikers
and also create areas that are attractive as convenient
for parking for bikes to park near the front door.
Thank you. If you have a four, you can ask
It. Well,
I don't think you also have the answer to this,
but I, I'm, I'm a, I'm an energy person
and so I wasn't sure if there was an analysis of the sort
of, um, either the maximum load
of the building based on its current,
build out the energy profile of the building over time
and you mentioned geothermal,
but the thoughts about the energy needs and,
and that sort of component of the cost
and ongoing operating costs.
Uh, we haven't gotten to long range operating costs.
Um, we haven't done the deep dive, um,
energy evaluation model yet.
Yep. One of the, um, one of our mc three members
suggested doing a, you know, pre-development, um,
lower test now to understand
how forest the building is today
or type the building is today
before we go too much further into our design.
So that was one of the elements
that we thought we would do in parallel if we go
to another level of detail.
And I think that would be really important.
The envelope improvements to Mahoney is a big cost
and we do have that cost in the project today
and if we can u utilize the windows the way they are today,
that would be a big savings.
Um, however, we also don't want
to replace Windows in 10 years, um,
after doing this major project.
So
Thank you Councilor Matthews.
Craig, I understand that you guys have come forward,
you've done a lot of study
and done a lot of testings with the building, with the,
with the soil and everything.
But a lot of words if you used tonight
are complex and unknown.
Alright, I guess I want to know how confident you guys are
with the 1 93
and that that's a good number with the complex, uh,
complexity of this and the unknowns
that you keep talking about.
And, uh,
before you answer this reminder
that we all know where you live.
Okay. But,
but, uh, I guess I get, I mean,
'cause once we put that out to bond at 1 93,
it's not like we can go back and ask for more money,
Right? So
how confident are you with the, you know, the unknowns
of the 1 93?
I am not confident. Dickie.
I think the or, um, the goal would be to
get, if we get direction is to iron out
before June those unknowns
and have less of them to be able to tell you exactly
what the project, we've only done so much.
We've done a lot, but we've only done so much.
And our goal is to go iron out all the pieces
that are question
Marks. So there's
a possibility that this number could go up.
Uh, sure. Yeah. I mean always.
I mean, I don't know where tariffs are gonna be tomorrow.
Right? You know, when,
and we had a climate, uh, the bidding, I'm going to look
for my colleagues, my owner's,
project managers over there as well.
But you know, a year ago we were,
the numbers on any project were, everyone was so nervous.
And then this year if we,
our cost estimators are bidding in today's dollars
and the bidding market is actually,
I wish we were building right now.
I wish we could be out to construction right now
'cause this is the, as cheap as it's been in a while, which
scares me is does that mean it's gonna go significantly up
or is it just going to gradually go up
as a predictable future?
But, um, I I can't tell you that right now
unless we, if, if we get direction that the scope is exactly
what you presented, we will design and focus on that number.
Um, so I mean, I guess, I don't know Anthony, you wanna
Yeah, you know, I, I I
I want somebody else on my side here
Throw all the rotten tomatoes.
Uh, yes. You know, as far as confidence in a number, it's
as confident as we can be given the amount of complexities
and unknowns This next phase with some direction from,
from you all to get through schematic design, each phase
of design, schematic design, design development, uh,
and contract documents.
We tighten up those unknowns and we bring those down.
But what Craig is alluding to is, is a project in Maine
that we recently bid a year ago when we started design,
same estimator, PCM local to this area
six Bay fire station.
Everybody was 700, $750 a square foot.
The numbers that we're seeing in the estimates, we went out
to bid and we came in at six 50 a square foot.
So all of a sudden there's a million plus in savings.
You know, nobody thought that was gonna happen.
But when we went through that design, we designed for
what are called ad alternates if we are so lucky to,
to get good quality low bids, we'll buy more
features in the building, the solar, the geothermal, some
of those things that you may want to have, are nice
to have but can't afford.
We were then able to pick up some of those niceties.
We are seeing that same thing on a project in Massachusetts,
which is generally much higher than Maine
because of the, the bid laws and the prevailing wage.
Uh, in Massachusetts we're working right now on a
$35 million fire station.
Much bigger than, than what we're looking at here.
And so far the general contractor saying every sub bid is
coming in below what our estimates were.
It's just a really good market right now.
Could that change, as Craig said, tariffs price
of fuel, what happens where in the,
in the world could send us in any direction?
Thank you. Yep.
I got one more for Yeah,
well the city manager one more for the, oh, go ahead.
So Scott, we have, uh, spent approximately 500,000
of the, uh, 5 million. Correct? That was
So that, that was a number from about a month
and a half ago, but was about 500, 580, um, as of today,
'cause invoices come in, it's about $780,000,
780,000 of the 5 million, right?
Yep. Should the city council decide to send them forward?
And I think that you told me that, uh,
it's a possibility that a lot of
that money could go rapidly fast in this next phase
and we could possibly be wasting that money
because if the project doesn't go forward, correct.
So you'd be looking at, I think, um, from
what SMRT had indicated, it's probably about another 400
to 500,000 to get us to June.
Right. The schematics,
Um, I hope I'm not low balling.
Um, three.
So, So part of the,
the project has evolved and changed.
Um, we don't, we, we, I don't know
where we are exact numbers today,
but we, I apologize, I don't have that number in front
of me, but it, it's going to schematic design
for $150 million project.
That's a large project.
And the fees are related to the cost of construction.
So as I mentioned, what we are hope hoping to do is just go
to schematic design and figure out that component.
If we get understand what the project is, if
or if it is the same project, we will clarify that
and provide that to the team.
Right. But, but, but to answer your question,
ultimately it will be on the order of magnitudes of hundreds
of thousands, more at to, in order to get you a,
a better number, uh,
and comfortable enough where this could go up
to a bond referendum.
Um, but you have to make that decision in July, early August
so that it can get on the ballot.
So there's a lot of work that would have to be done
between now and then and yes, certainly
that these would all be sunk costs if eventually it went to,
uh, bond in November and failed. Right,
Right. Thank you.
Okay. I know we'd like to hear from our, um, folks, so
Let's, sorry, one more go.
No, no, no. You don't have to apologize.
I'm just want to recognize Yes,
that I know there's public comment out there, so thank you.
Sorry guys. Councilor Walker, your questions.
Um, so for, if, if things went in a different direction
and we ended up, um,
spending the rough estimate of $154 million to deal
with all of the issues that we have within the current sites
that they live in, now that 154 million, is that something
that we would have to bond as well? Yes,
Correct. And
I mean that we use that as comparative purposes only.
Correct. That's not what we would recommend to you
because there's so many limitations with that,
with the library parking.
Um, if that, if counsel wanted to do a different option,
we would ask that, um, you know, you, you know,
reformat them three C committee or whatever
and have us come back with some sort
of proposal to look at something else.
But, but any sort of project is gonna require, uh,
a significant bond.
And so whether we renovate on site, whether we use Mahoney,
whether we find a completely new empty space
and build everything new, uh, all of it requires bonding.
Okay. Thank you. Do we have other questions?
I, I think I have a question.
It's either foolish or brave to ask it.
Um, if you were working Craig in a community
that you didn't live in, in a community, in a community
that had expressed no positive feelings about
historic preservation
and the reuse of a beautiful
building that has been important in its history,
what do you say to them?
Knock it down. Build something new, it'll be cheaper
and it'll work for you.
Uh, there's three things
I guess, I guess way I would answer that
and I'd defer to others maybe in the public comment
to weigh in as well.
'cause my opinion is Mahoney has a second chapter.
It is a building that is well built
and has served the community well.
It's just looking for its future
and it works for this project.
It's got complexities and it is costly,
but it will have a, we're not making compromises
by using this building.
We are, uh, investing in an asset that the community has
and will enjoy, our grandkids will enjoy
for hundreds of years.
Um, answer, answering the same question for the central fire
and the police station, it's harder
to convert those buildings
and more costly to reuse them.
We look, we, we um, part of our study was evaluating
how we can, any way we can use the existing
fire station and the money that it costs
to improve that building
because that it, city hall is an essential services,
but put police and fire at a different level
and different requirements.
So renovating that building for continued police use
is an amazing effort and costly
and we would be compromised every day that we use it.
So I answer the question differently for police,
I would love or for fire station.
It's just so hard to reuse that building.
Whereas Mahoney is really set up to be, um,
for our, the ask of us.
It works really well for that building
and I would encourage us to keep that building for this use.
If we don't want to go there.
Then there's other, somebody else may answer the question.
It's more, it's too expensive to, for another use,
but for our use, it's, it's really suited well.
And primarily we have a lot
of natural light in that building.
The shape of it allows a lot of natural light
for all the spaces and that's very rare in new construction.
Thank you very much. Alright, let's hear from some
of our members of the public.
Remember you should you still
state your name for the workshop?
Yeah. Name and street. Thank you. Three minutes.
You'll, Scott's gonna run the timer for us, I believe. Yep.
And he will also give you a warning when you're at 30
seconds left.
Okay.
That's my check. Yeah. All right.
Olivia Montgomery Ocean Street.
Uh, I wanted there a concern about the proposed new police
department building and its proximity
to the Mahoney City Center as a resident of South Portland
and clinical social worker
and professor of social work in this community.
I believe this presents significant concerns
for our most vulnerable populations accessing city services
without fear, uh,
and will result in decreased community engagement.
No matter how much good intention you have, the reality
of violent policing in the United States right now, uh,
has created a deep fear in police presence.
This new station right next to city services is going
to result in the immediate disenfranchisement
of large portions of our immigrant community
and communities of color who simply will not access
or even attempt to access these services
because of police, police proximity.
This is as true today as it will be five years, four years,
three months from now when this will be complete.
Does that mean that the South Portland PD should give up on
their great outreach work or to these groups
or abandon their commitment
to building trust back with a community?
Absolutely not. Uh, please don't give up on that, including,
uh, the wonderful commitment to not working with ice.
But we have to consider the reality of
how placing a police station next to city services is going
to prevent our marginalized neighbors from accessing these
essential services, uh, including voting potentially,
which I just learned about tonight
and ultimately from being a part
of this community. So thank you for your time.
Thank you. Who do we have next? Thanks.
Hi, David Bertoni.
I live on Ocean Street and I've only lived in South Portland
coming up on three years.
I just have a couple of broad comments.
The first is, you'll notice in municipalities across the
country most of the rehabilitation
of these older, beautiful buildings.
And it is beautiful and it is a,
a dramatic introduction to the city.
When you come over from the old port, they're taken on
by commercial enterprises.
There are large hotel chains that take these buildings
and do a cost benefit analysis
and are able to take on the inherent risks
that go on when you take an old building
and put it to a modern use.
And one of my reactions,
initially when I saw the $80 million number float floating
around, I almost had a heart attack
and the 200 million, well, you know,
I I I may well have had one.
Um, you've got Portland
that has put a moratorium on hotels.
You've got the roo, the, the,
the RU Institute coming in full bore.
You've got this area being the gateway
to a potentially vibrant South Portland
area, and you're not.
And I, I didn't see any evidence that you worked
with developers to see if there was a commercial solution
here to create a hub of activity, a hotel, an Alamo cinema
and drafthouse, something to create a hook.
It's a moment of opportunity when Portland is shutting down
hotel development to have something like that here.
So that's piece one.
Piece two is these,
the projects I've been involved in fairly large commercial
projects and, and energy projects.
There's always gonna be uncertainties
that will drive the price up.
It's almost inevitable.
And even if you limited it to 192 million bond
with interest, that's $300 million over the course
of that bond life.
And it's about, it's,
it's bordering on $10,000 per household
of debt taken on for this city.
I, and I'm not surprised, I wasn't surprised
by the large number by the way,
because one of my first professional introductions, uh,
when I was a a a new lawyer was working
with defense contractors who were being pilled for their
$10,000 hammers and, and,
and $500,000 bathrooms.
And this process, it, it reminded me of that 30 seconds.
You, you have a system where everybody puts a wishlist in.
There's no budget going in, there's no defining limit as to
how much the city can afford.
And then of course, the price gets driven up.
This is a, this is a palace and palaces cost money.
So I really think that this process
has been an educational one,
but I think there needs to be a bit of a reset and, and,
and that's what I think the next step should be. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Good evening. I'm Dawn,
LED nine 90 Highland Ave in South Portland.
I'll probably be run out of town
after I give my suggestions, but we'll try it.
Um, I've got questions for, is it Greg?
Greg Craig, I'm sorry.
Uh, so looking at the fire station, was it based on wants
or was it based on needs?
The reason I ask is six Bay Garage, uh, six Bay doors,
both front and back when we only have one Fire
engine number eight and also one rescue there.
So I guess I would question the size of that.
Uh, also, cash Corner was open, what, 5, 6, 7 years ago.
Can't remember now, $7 million, whatever.
But that fire station did not require front
and back bay doors.
So I would question that, Uh,
$195 million is going to be a tough pill
for people to swallow.
I think what should happen, my personal suggestion is
we should look at the can that's been kicked down the road
for many years, and that would be public safety.
So I think looking at the fire station
and also the police department, getting those built, uh,
that would save a lot of money temporarily.
And as far as City Hall, as far as the rest
of Mahoney is concerned, I would probably try
to get a developer in there
and maybe have, you know, workforce housing, a lot
of people making 40, $50,000 a year they can't find housing.
That'd be perfect. And if the city wants to carve out,
you know, the auditorium in the gym,
that is certainly something that could be negotiated
with whoever buys it.
At least we could be generating tax revenues.
Um, so that would be my, uh, my idea for that.
As far as the city hall employees, the planning, assessing,
that sort of thing, I would get on the lookout
for an office building by the
mall when they come up for sale.
If you could buy an office building
that's already structured for it with minimal changes,
and if you could buy something like that for $20 million,
that'd be a heck of a deal.
So I think that's probably something
that we need to keep our eyes open.
But to try to get a bond passed for $195 million,
I can tell you right now when they see the price tag
and the impact on taxes, it's not going to fly.
We're just wasting our time. I would go piecemeal.
Public safety always has a good rapport
with people when they look at funding public safety.
I would go with those two first
and then basically tackle the rest later. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
I am Kay Kin. I live on Romano Road, south Portland.
I commend the city council, the committees
and others who have been working on this issue for years.
Thank you. I'm going to echo some others
who have stood here
and said, be
bold, be brave.
Think for the future. No more kicking the
can down the road.
Do this now. Before I moved to Maine,
others had the foresight to build a beautiful library.
It must have been a big lift for them back then,
but I have benefited from it since I arrived here.
And I continue to be enriched by it.
Almost daily generations have appreciated it,
and that it will reach forward to more generations.
I know in the 1980s,
I wasn't paying any attention to city government,
but I'm grateful for those in those days who went big
and built the community center.
I, my children, my children's children,
and countless thousands of others have
and continue to benefit from that expense
and investment Daily.
Lee, now it's our turn.
This is an investment in the future of all of us.
And if we're building for the future, let's do it.
Thank you very much. Kay.
Hi, Maxim. Beecher, Ridgeland Avenue.
Um, it's, it's pretty scary to even hear a number
as big as that, quite honestly.
Um, but at the same time, I have to say to you, Mahoney
is a building that represents South Portland
in every sense of the word.
And I would hope and pray that we would think about that.
Um, I've been through it numerous times.
Um, and would just like to say, um, I, you know,
I wish they could bring those numbers down dramatically.
And I think they're gonna have heard
that from us and from you folks.
And I think it's possible to have that happen.
And yes, I do think the library needs to be, um,
I was gonna say about three times,
four times bigger than what it is now.
We're very fortunate people read.
I mean, and that makes such a difference in the
quality of citizenry.
And I would just simply say, you know, I don't know how
to get this number down.
I just say keep Mahoney
and turn it into the representative of South Portland,
because that's who we are.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Lawrence Pirro, Deek Street.
Thank you for all your effort and the time devoted to this.
Cause The work that has gone into this is thorough,
impressive, and appreciated.
As a taxpayer and community member sitting in this chair
and seeing it unfold, I can't help
but think that this is over the top.
It is all seemingly grandiose
and egregious given the times we are living in,
when many in our community are struggling
with the ever-rising costs of taxes, insurance, utilities,
or just to keep food on the table.
We as a city are full speed ahead with developing such bold,
brazen, and most comprehensive ideas for city services.
What has been done up to this point does well
to fulfill the most ideal scenarios for all buildings
in terms of scale and scope and nice to haves,
but that will not sway voters.
If you're looking for voters to be on board, scale it back,
Hamlin city hall, assessor's office
and community theater would be a more
reasonable and sensible project.
And if I could scream at the top of my lungs, I'd shout,
save the library and save the green space.
There is so little left
and our community has voiced the same.
And we carefully consider the historic significance
of the Mahoney building, but disregard the library,
as I've said before, it would be irresponsible
and frankly tackle us to propose this bond to voters as is.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. Alright, come on.
Get yourselves ready. Come on up.
I, I wasn't gonna do this,
but, uh, Peter Cullen in from Richard Street, um,
in 50 years, the geography of South Portland has changed
by 0% population growth.
13% think about that
because the library is now gonna expand by over 40%.
The fire station is expanding by over 50% of its capacity
for, for, uh, engines and, and service vehicles.
And maybe you ought to take a step back
because I don't know if either one of those is failing.
And I think we have pretty good city services performing
even with the limitations they live in right now.
So, you know, if you want to make a proposition
to the public, I don't know, you can do a,
a positive ROI on this.
And so I think you need to think about that.
The second thing is, when we bought our first house,
and this wasn't in South Oil, we always wanted a sunroom,
but we never had the money for it.
We worked around it.
We ended up leaving that house 12 years later,
never had a sunroom because we
didn't have the money, money for it.
So remind yourselves of that situation
for homeowners in the city of Southport.
Thank you.
Hi there. I'm Shelby Layton.
I live on Stanley Street near Mahoney.
Um, I wanna ask you to
approve this proposal, but without the police station.
As a taxpayer, I want my money invested in community
building, not the over policing of our community.
We should be funding a library.
We should be funding community gathering spaces.
We should be funding social services
that meet our community's health needs.
What we should not be doing is putting more funding
towards an already massive police department
and incarcerating our neighbors.
How many people could we feed for the amount
that we're spending on a fitness center for the police
instead of raising our taxes to build a new police station
and spending it in the materials?
It said $27 million on building a
police station.
I would encourage the council to think about
how we can right size our police department
and renovate the existing building for a future
where we have less policing, not more policing.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. I'll keep going.
Hi, my name is Joan Kelly Spear a I wanna thank everyone
for all the work you did
because it's obvious you guys did phenomenal work.
I'm also here as a taxpayer.
I'm doing shock and awe right now.
I went to last meeting, I was shocked
that people weren't more concerned when that number dropped.
I, I just, I'm amazed. I also was interested.
There wasn't a lot of coverage on that number dropping.
I, I do understand that there's coverage here now,
which I think is appropriate
because I'm gonna round it up to 200 million.
'cause to me that's a tremendous amount.
I'm assuming that you have to go to referendum,
and I'd like clarity on that.
'cause I heard you're 70% and yet we're not meeting it,
and you have to go to rent referendum.
So I'm a little concerned on that.
And my other concern is, is there a bond gonna be coming
through for the water treatment plant?
What's that gonna be?
And is that on top of the effect of 200 mil million?
Thank you.
Thanks very much.
Uh, ed Cobb Romano Road, um, I've lived here since 1993.
Um, when I first moved here, my taxes were $1,600 a year,
and it was pretty affordable.
If I'm not mistaken, based on this proposal, property taxes
for the average person is gonna go off another $1,400,
which is gonna be, my taxes are probably gonna be over
$6,000 every month,
which seems like an awful lot of money.
What I'm interested in, or I thought was interesting was
when we went through the whole timeline,
what I never saw was the $74 million bid,
or at least the number that we were initially given.
I certainly know the $194 million bid now,
but I was, I thought that was interesting that
that was left out because
that was the initial cost estimate, essentially,
or the number we were talking about to echo what the,
I can't remember the gentleman's name
back here, I believe was an attorney.
But you know what I do with Mahoney,
because it wasn't good enough for those of you
who were like, oh, Mahoney, oh my God, if we give it up,
it'll be the end of the world.
It wasn't good enough to renovate when
the state was gonna pay for it.
I just find that interesting. It wasn't good enough then
we're gonna, no, we'll leave it here.
And now we, taxpayer has been paying approximately a hundred
thousand dollars a year to keep that building empty.
We spent approximately $700,000.
What I really think should happen is, yeah, probably need
to do something with the fire department.
You have, you probably need to do
something with the police department.
But I said, I stood here a couple council meetings ago when,
uh, a company had bought a building on Darling Dale,
and I'm looking at it on the tax assessor's website.
It's approximately, according to their website,
60,000 square feet.
That company bought that building in March of last year
for $6 million, 60,000 square feet.
I guess my question would be is can we house the assessor
and every administration person in a
60,000 square foot building?
And I think we can. I would call Live Nation,
who was in Portland and wanted to build a nice,
you know, uh, concert venue.
And I would say, look at Mahon and School.
Let's, why don't we set up a deal?
Why don't we actually bring projects
that generate tax dollars so they aren't stuck on our backs?
Excuse my getting excited.
I get a little emotional when my taxes are gonna go
$6,000 a year.
I would never vote for this in a million years. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Okay, who else?
Henry Silve, uh, second Street.
Um, my partner
and I just purchased our first home in
South Portland, uh, in December.
And we're beyond excited.
We've spent way more money than we own.
Um, and I just want to stress
how challenging it is
to buy a house right now in South Portland
as a first time home buyer,
and with, I think it's like an 18% tax increase,
it just makes it that much harder.
Um, I used to go to a lot of these city council meetings
and up until October
it felt like the focus was on police and fire,
and it was very manageable.
And now it seems like it has shifted
to six buildings, which is how we're at this, um,
$194 million project.
And so I think, um,
what we can do is hopefully scale back
and focus on what needs to happen rather than a wishlist
of kind of hopes and ideals.
Thank you.
Thank you. Do we have
additional public comment?
Please. You've all been here a while.
Feels good to stand up.
Uh, my name's Patrick Cost and I live on Willard Haven Road.
Um, I'm gonna read to be quick.
Uh, the $190 million price tag being considered tonight is a
result of decades poor management, stewardship
of city facilities, lack of capital planning
and investment has made many buildings obsolete
and generated enormous re replacement costs.
Future practices must be different,
so this doesn't happen again.
Over two years ago, after attending a meeting on the
facilities planning committee, I shared
with the city cost data from a national cost consultant
that contradicted the budget numbers the committee was using
to predict construction costs.
Unfortunately, for unknown reasons,
the cost data I shared was ignored by the city
and its consultants.
So the inflated cost before you tonight were foreseeable
and much time was lost.
To map out a strategy to pay for all these recommendations,
the need to address the city's facilities is real.
But I believe the price tag
to do it all at once is too large for most taxpayers
to support my property.
Taxes have recently doubled and the school system, county
and sewer district are forecasting significant near term
increased expenses.
Mahoney is beloved by South Portland citizens.
It's vacant, should be renovated immediately,
so city services can be improved.
I believe the renovation could be more modest than
currently proposed.
The interior can be modernized without a complete upgrade
of the building into a 21st century energy code
compliance structure.
For example, my firm, I'm an architect,
recently renovated a hundred year old building at Bates
College into a Center for Student Services.
We were able to make it accessible, install modern systems,
and renovate its interior.
Without an energy retrofit of the, the envelope
of the building, Bates could not afford
that additional expense at the time
and needed the building to serve the campus community.
One strategy we used
to make the building accessible was lowering the grade
adjacent to the building so
that you can enter the building directly.
Same error building as Mahoney.
This allowed one elevator
to serve multiple levels without adding onto
the exterior of the building.
This approach could be considered for Mahoney 30 seconds.
I support replacing our obsolete facilities,
but in a phased approach over a longer period of time.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. Okay, thanks.
Jack. Proposal 1 95 Walnut Street.
Um, I'd like to ask, um, what our
bond debt is right now.
As you know, they're talking 194 million bond, um,
being added to what is our bond debt. Um,
If you want to keep that question there,
generally the city manager answers questions
when you're finished speaking, right? Yep.
So, um, also
at $194 million back in I think 2024 when
we were reevaluated, um,
If Some of you people on the city council
and some people sitting in here right now
witnessed people in tears right here at this podium,
wondering how they were going to afford to keep their homes
with this reevaluation that we had.
Following that, we had our municipal
and school budget, and just recently we just voted
to, um, upgrade the school facilities,
the football field and the track.
Now we're asking 194 million.
Where are these people gonna be able to stay in their homes?
There's people here in our, that have been here forever,
born and raised in this city that may lose their homes
or may have to move or sell out
because 194 million coming our way.
We need to look at different scenarios
to fix this problem
and not put it on the shoulders again,
like this other man said, on the backs of our taxpayers,
especially our taxpayers that are on fixed incomes,
which many probably in this room right now
are on fixed incomes.
So we need to realize that now's the time.
Yes, I was four originally.
Um, let's use Mahoney for, um,
the city, the city
of offices.
But that was when, you know,
and I even thought 74 million was a lot of money.
Now we're at triple that 194.
So something has to be done.
We need three seconds to look at plan C,
plan D, whatever it happens to be.
And maybe going forward, we need to do something with,
you know, one
or two buildings at a time where people can afford it.
Um, I think I read not too long ago that there was
somebody said that quoted that there was 1,150 2 million,
uh, $1,152 added to our taxes
for this $194 a million dollar bond,
uh, after our municipal
and our school board budget.
Okay, thank you very much. Thanks.
Anyone else have a comment?
Good evening. Uh, I'm Chris Kessler.
I live, uh, on Stanley Street.
I'm one of our state representatives to the legislature.
Um, I just want to say first of all, um, uh, thank you
for your service to the city.
Um, this is probably
The most important decision you'll be making,
uh, as a counselor.
Um, and the gravity is pretty large.
Um, this has transformed a lot, uh, since, uh, it first
came, uh, before the public.
Um, I feel that, uh,
it would be important to give the citizens
of South Portland options when, when this goes to bond.
I think it would be smart to, um, potentially put,
uh, the Mahoney as a separate bond question
to police and fire to potentially, uh,
hide off a chunk that we could chew a little bit easier.
Um, I think that the potential for a city center, um,
to meet the, the citizens' needs, um,
and consolidate things has, has a lot of great potential
for the future of our city.
Um, and there could be a lot
of wonderful things that happen there.
And there's a lot of ways that I think that we could, uh,
be creative and innovative in generating revenue
in the future to help pay for the debt service.
Um, I really would like the council to look at, um,
the other properties that could be for sale,
look at other potential ownership models,
not just necessarily sell it to pay off,
uh, the debt service,
but continuing to own it to generate revenue
beyond tax revenue.
Um, looking at those options I think would make me feel more
comfortable, uh, voting yes on a bond like that.
But I would personally love more information, um, as
to the potentials for those properties.
Um, and, uh, don't hold your breath for, uh,
local option sales tax 30 seconds
because, um, it's extremely difficult to, uh,
essentially change the constitution in, uh, a government
that that is extremely, uh, partisan at the moment.
So, um, once again, thank you for your service
and, um, not an easy decision,
but, um, separate the bonds, I think that
that may be a step forward.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, representative.
Um, is there anyone else who would like
to make public comment?
Okay, um, we want to move into council discussion.
Um, pardon me, I got some questions. Oh, okay.
Let's let the men, I'm distracted.
Mayor needs a bio break
and, um, I'm going to ask Counselor Pride to sit in the seat
and please get going on the question, Scott.
So the first question we had was, um,
is the fire department numbers based on wants versus needs?
There was a question that there was the, um, assertion,
you know, hey, cash corner, we built that
and it didn't have front and back, you know, drive through
and, and what we're proposing, uh, at, um,
central does have that.
So, so is this a a want versus a need? I'm not, uh, sure.
I guess our fire chief is
volunteering to answer that question.
I, I think there were a couple for me.
So do you mind if I just hammer 'em out while I'm here?
Uh, sure. Alright.
Um, so wants versus needs in terms of drive
through base cash corn does not
have complete drive through base.
It has some from skill and street to RU road,
but not the primary ones that we use.
It's an industry standard.
If our lock in accommodate it, we should do that.
Um, there was another question about how many bays we need.
Um, and uh, the comment was there are four,
there are actually eight at Central Fire.
There are four on Broadway
and four adjacent to the Rusty Lantern.
Um, the comment was that there was only one
engine, one ambulance there.
We have one engine, two ambulances, uh,
1, 2, 4 service cars, a plow truck, a foam trailer,
and a UTV at Central Fire Station right now.
So that's all in the eight storage base that we have there.
I think there was a question about the overall
size of the building.
Um, the new building accounts for an EOC above grade,
the one that we have right now is below grade.
Um, it does have a slightly larger fitness
center, which I will defend.
Um, it has the same amount of bedrooms
that we have currently at the central fire station.
The new plan has fewer offices than we have
currently at Central Fire.
It has many more bathroom facilities than we have at
Central Fire, which is good.
It has a PPE storage area and a decon facility.
All industry standard things that add to the square footage.
Okay, thanks Chief. Anything folks want to add, uh,
from the colleagues at MIT can't top that can't top that.
So the next question was, um, wanting confirmation that
this project would need to go to referendum.
So yes, it does any sort of general obligation bond,
whether it's for Mahoney, whether renovate on site,
whether again, whether, you know, we find a new parcel
of land and build everything new, um, for any sort
of general obligation bond that does require rotor approval.
Uh, so without that, the project doesn't happen.
Um, there is borrowing that's happening
for our water resource department.
Uh, they have a major upgrade, Pearl Street pump station,
um, and some other work that needs to be done
that we've talked about a couple
times here at these meetings.
And during the budget process, that's a little bit different
because that's not funded by a general obligation bond
that's funded, as we've talked about by a revenue bond.
And revenue bonds don't require voter approval.
Um, so if you think about it, um, it's uh, uh, it's funded
by revenue generated.
It's a little bit different than how, um,
general obligation funds, um, can be funded.
So, so that also, as we've talked about,
there is a significant impact there that's gonna happen, um,
on the sewer rate as well.
Um, ed Cobb asked about can we have,
can we house a 60,000?
Can we house these facilities in a
60,000 square foot building?
Um, based on the programming, I don't know if any
of the programmers, uh, the design team,
can we fit that in there.
Um, as an example, I think this would be City Hall
Hamlin staff assessing, um, et cetera.
Uh, yeah, I haven't been up here before.
Adam architect with SMP, um, certainly, um,
a program of the, if, if the program for city services, um,
was 60,000 square feet.
I don't know what the, I don't have off the top of my head
what the actual number is, but it, it could fit in a,
in a building of that size.
But the, the,
and we've, we've talked about that, um, as you know,
with the M three C committee and the working group.
Um, but, um, there is a challenge there with, um,
where that would be, uh, finding
that building, finding that land.
Um, but you know, it,
it would a 60,000 square foot program fit in a
60,000 square foot building?
Sure.
Okay. Folks want to add, uh, on that,
is it, is it, I guess maybe a follow up is,
is it move in ready at, you know,
the example was you could buy it for 6 million.
Is it move in ready? Would it be ready to
for all the city services or when?
No, it would've to do a similar design, uh, design process
and construction renovation most likely with any, uh, any
building that was purchased or leased.
Okay. Alan, current bond debt,
we do have a, just
so everyone knows on our board doc docs agenda software
packet, um, under this item there are several attachments.
One of them is a memo from the finance director.
It has a schedule that lists out current bond debt service,
the debt service that's going to come on as a result
of the school athletic field.
And then the estimated unlikely scenario
where we bonded this project at one 94 million day,
one didn't phase it, didn't have any other revenue sources
and send it to taxpayers.
So there is a chart, um, that's been included with that memo
that has this information,
but can, can you maybe provide a little bit more detail on
current bond costs and, and those other costs? Right.
And I would set our total outstanding general obligation
debt is around 90 million.
Um, what's shown on that chart is 46 million
because there's a significant portion
of our debt right now is being paid by the state for the,
um, middle school project.
So that is not on the tax rate.
So that's deducted from the amount in that chart.
Um, that was the answer. It's our outstanding debt.
Okay. Any questions that I had written down there?
Yeah, and I don't think I had any more. Um, no.
Okay. Do any counselors need
to stand up or anything?
I know I sound like a real mom here,
but I've been one in the past life.
Alright. You're okay? Excellent.
Alright, well we reached the point of counselor discussion
and, um, who would like to maybe say something for, ah,
counselor Walker, you would like
to give us some discussion? Yes, thank you.
Thank you Mayor Tipton.
Uh, first I wanna thank the members
of the Mahoney committee, both residents
and staff for the extensive work
and time that you've put in to bring us this recommendation.
This represents hours and hours of your time and effort,
and I really do appreciate it.
Next to the two questions before us.
As to the first, yes,
I support the Mahoney Committee's
recommendation wholeheartedly.
And as for the second, no, I do not think
that the price tag changes the direction of the project.
And let me tell you why. First,
we have a fiscal responsibility to provide safe
and accessible spaces for residents
and staff to conduct city business and access services.
This project is not as, some have called it a Taj Mahal.
Instead, it's the direct results of decades
of deferred maintenance
and a bandaid approach to fixing things.
This isn't a case of wants versus needs. This is a must.
It's a Gordian knot.
We can't just pick apart one thread
of this project without addressing the rest.
This involves so many city issues
that we've kicked down the road for years
and years to deal with later, well later is now.
So let's talk about the project. $194 million.
Let's talk about why it's so expensive.
As we've heard, it's built on an old dump.
So environmental remediation alone is a
huge driver of the expense.
The building itself, as we've heard,
it's a hundred years old.
That means there's no elevators for a DA access,
there's no ac, the modern heating system
and countless other things.
And then finally the moving parts.
There's so much to this project
because there's so much that needs to be done
to address these issues.
It's working bathrooms in the firehouse.
It's no standing water in the police station.
It's consistently working elevators at City Hall.
It's a reliable HVAC system at the library
so the building can stay open.
It's so many things that we haven't addressed until now
and they all cost money
and they're going to cost more if we wait.
Let's talk about what's not making it expensive.
It's not a fancy project. It's not building big offices.
It's not frills, it's not extras.
This committee, the committee that's made up of residents,
taxpayers, just like the rest of us, your friends
and neighbors have worked hard to bring forward something
that is safe, functional,
and meets the community's needs for generations to come.
I think that we need to support this project
as it's currently constituted.
Yes, it's expensive, but neglect brought us here.
Doing nothing is not an option.
Doing nothing would cost this community more than we can
even imagine right now, ignoring the problem
because we can't afford it doesn't make it go away.
We have to figure out how to afford it, how to pay
for it in a way that is not on the backs of our residents,
but we do have to move forward.
We can't afford not
to. Those are my thoughts.
Alright, councilor West, thank you very much
and you have pretty clearly
answered the two questions before us.
I'll just remind, um, our folks that the council is asked
to address, we're asked to confirm whether
the council supports the recommended conceptual plans
for the Mahoney campus and then also whether
or not the unanticipated price tag
of one 94 million changes the direction council wishes
to take with this project.
And you have answered both of those. Alright.
Um, it looks like Counselor Scott would like
to speak. I'm happy to go next.
Please do. Um, I, I believe,
although I do respect your opinion on all things,
I have a a different approach.
Um, I also thank the committee and all of the work
and hours, um, that have gone on to gone into this.
And I think, um,
although it's challenging to see the number,
it is a hugely important aspect of this work
to understand sort of the scope of what we could do.
Uh, whether or not we characterize that as a want, a need,
a Taj Mahal, et cetera, is up to everyone's own opinion.
Um, I, uh,
do not support the recommended current Mahoney plan.
Um, I and I, I'm sure I'm going
to be vilified on all sides, which made me,
makes this a good decision.
But I'm, I'm not currently in favor of, um,
of moving the library and updating the library.
I understand that it, it has some needs and,
and should be done and maybe has been neglected.
Um, but I think it is sort of a, a large component
of this project that is, is not sort of an absolute must
and, um, should be evaluated in terms of being taken out.
Um, I am in favor
of moving Mahoney City Services into a consolidated area.
And I think similar to running any company
or organization, it's really helpful for staff to be able
to be in one place and for citizens to be able
to access services and not get one answer in one building
and be told to go two blocks down the road
and, and get something else.
So I, I'm in favor of that.
Uh, I am not, with all respect to the police chief,
I'm not in favor of having the police station next to, um,
the city center for many, many reasons.
Um, but those are the sort of big aspects of the plan
that I am not in favor of.
And I'm the new kid on the council,
so I have absolutely no history to go on.
I appreciate that as well.
Um, my thought on Mahoney,
because I do appreciate the idea
of putting the city center together, um, is to,
hopefully there's an opportunity to do this,
but to take some time with the design team, um,
and, and sort of sit down.
I really would like to understand sort of
what are the bare minimums to have staff there.
We moved city staff into the Hamlin School,
which was an old school.
We have been operating in city hall, which definitely,
um, has some challenges.
And the assessor's office, um, is what it is.
Uh, I think we're New Englanders,
we raise barns together, maybe not recently.
Um, but we have the adage,
I wrote it down so I wouldn't forget.
Use it up, wear it out, make it do or do without.
Um, and I think there's a lot of work that can be done
at a bare minimum to kind of get city services into Mahoney.
I'll get a paint brush and a hammer.
Um, and then it gives us the opportunity
to look at the other buildings that we have vacated.
Think about them for revenue for sale, put together a plan
to then continue to fund the work that needs to happen.
Um, to be honest, I I don't really,
really have a great opinion about sort of the funding
of the fire and police
because those facilities really do need some upgrades.
I'm, I'm amazed at the quality of work
that happens in those two departments in the
facilities that they are.
I hope if you have not gone through any of the buildings
or missed the building crawl, it's, um, pretty stunning.
Um, so that, that's kind of my thought.
Um, I also have a lot of questions about sort of financing
and thinking about what goes into a bond referendum versus
what can be utilized down the road if we move out of city,
out of other city buildings.
If we can create a plan for sort of a, a nonprofit
to come in and maybe renovate the theater
or sort of other uses
that might have other funding if we sort
of separate out some of the components
and not think of it as just one tax bill.
Um, so I think
that's what I have to say.
And I hope that there is an opportunity, um, to sort
of churn on this a little bit.
I know one workshop is not really sort of enough
to solve all the problems or answer all my questions.
So I would hope that there's some opportunity to churn
through this, get a couple of these questions answered
and think about like, what are, what are the components
between zero 54 million
or 154 million of renovations, $194 million of sort
of all brand new to think about some other options.
And I again, appreciate the committee's work, appreciate
that they have, I think, completed their charge.
That's where I am at this moment,
nine 12 on Tuesday.
Thank you for entertaining my comments, mayor.
Thank you for making your comments entertaining. Um,
That I'm good for.
All right. Who would like
to say something next on the council?
It is just you and
Heap suit.
All right, counselors, I'm gonna start calling on you if you
don't come to some conclusions.
Thank you. And let me first start
by thanking all the members
of the public who are here tonight.
Your input is just tremendously important and we do listen.
I also wanna thank our design team.
We've, I've been, you're all terrific
and you've done a great job.
I am so pleased that the city retained your services
and that you've been as willing as you have been to,
to interact with us and to answer questions
and, uh, to be patient and then of course, the committee.
Yeah, I, I, when I was looking
through the resumes when people first applied, I was just
so impressed as I frequently am at the level of talent
that we have in our community, the diversity of skills.
And I'm just very, very grateful to live in South Portland.
Having said that, I will not agree to go to the ballot
with $194 million bond issue.
That is simply a non-starter for me.
Yes, I agree completely with Council Walker
that we didn't cause this.
It's many, many years of deferred maintenance, of failing to
face up to the responsibility to maintain properties,
feeling a a lot.
But, and we inherited it.
So it's not, but the trouble is, it's not fair
to put it on your shoulders because,
and so where I'm coming from is this, I think we have
to divide this project into two parts.
And as some couple of speakers said, you could look at it
as the public safety side or the Mahoney side,
but you can't go first with the public safety side
because if we put the police station at Mahoney
and then we're never able to finance Mahoney,
it was significantly reduce the market value of Mahoney
to sell down the road.
So we really have to start with Mahoney, which is, well
for a number of other reasons too, Mahoney's,
the empty building that we have right now.
And if we can do something with Mahoney,
then it frees up at least two other parcels of land
that we can use to get revenue
to help fund the second phase,
which is our public safety phase down the road.
Now, having said that, I would, I,
where I can see us going
after this evening is to ask our, um, our team,
our design team to factor out the Mahoney cost.
If we just go with Mahoney as alternative one,
I strongly support the auditorium and the gym.
I think the public facilities part
of the project a really important,
and I'm not willing to give those up.
So that's what I see as topic one.
However, topic two is to have Mahoney without the library.
When we first were looking at, and,
and let me say this, I understand
that the library building isn't,
doesn't function very well as a library.
When I was first elected, I took a tour of the library.
I I saw the shortcomings. I see them myself when I walk.
'cause I like the library and I walk up those stairs.
And I think this is absurd that I have
to walk up these stairs to get,
but it's, it's a building that functions,
it serves the function and it serves our community.
And in April what happened was when we agreed
to have a library, it was
then we were gonna incorporate the library while slightly
increasing the projected project costs.
But now when you look at it,
it's adding a approximately just my, uh,
calculations, $15 million to the cost, at least
because of the, uh, because of that new construction
and filling in the back of Mahoney.
So it also limits some possibilities, uh,
that we have at Mahoney.
So I think topic one is, okay,
alternative one, just Mahoney.
Topic two is Mahoney without the library edition.
And then topic three is kind of where I think my
counselor colleague was going, where, what's bare bones?
What's the minimum thing we can do at Mahoney?
And, and I, and I'm not sure what that is
because I have to, you know, rely on the design staff.
But I think where we are is
that the committee has done a great job,
but now it's the buck stops here
because this is dollars and cents.
It's no more. We, we, we didn't give any,
we haven't even talked about a budget
until now in the project.
But now we as the council have to say,
what can we legitimately ask our community to do
where we have a chance of, of, of passing it
and getting the approval of our community to,
to issue some kind of a bond.
And so what I would suggest as a result of tonight's,
and I think we have to keep this moving
because it's a fair amount of work,
but I absolutely do not wanna spend any more money on
schematic designs or anything else until we
work on our project scope
and see where the council wants to go with it.
I would like to propose that, um,
that the mayor appoints a subcommittee of counselor Scott,
who has some strong opinions about this
and me, who has some strong opinions about this, to work
with our design team over the next month so
that in February we can come back to the council
with some alternatives for the Mahoney part of the project
and, uh, and take a look at it in
terms of dollars and cents.
Thank you.
I'll go next. Uh, couple of things.
Uh, Scott, uh, I don't,
I'm not sure this question was answered
because it was out of the scope of the, uh,
workshop tonight, but, uh, the, uh,
Pearl Street Pump station, did you answer
that question for that gentleman tonight? I missed that.
Yeah, there's, there's not a re it's, it's a revenue bond,
so it's not a vote of the voters
And I understand that. But,
uh, what, that's going to add a significant amount.
Do we have any idea what that's gonna add?
Uh, we, we don't Right now, at the end of January,
we're gonna have, um, we, we have a consultant
that's helping us with the revenue analysis that's required
for, um, doing revenue bonds.
And so we're gonna have that information
and once we have more details, uh,
that'll be presented probably at a council, um,
presentation at the beginning of your meeting
so you have that information.
Alright. So that's why it makes this
decision a little bit more difficult
because of the unknown of the, uh, the, uh,
Pearl Street pump station, which could, uh, come
to about 50 million.
Uh, yeah, the bids, uh,
the estimates are a little bit lower than that.
They're in the high thirties,
but there's also some, uh,
work at the plant that's around 10 million.
So Right. Probably just under 50 million.
Okay. So, uh, obviously, uh, I wanted this,
uh, project to work.
I guess one of the other questions I have is, uh,
we're not really here tonight to send this to referendum.
We're here tonight just to whether
or not we want to move it forward.
And I heard Craig say,
does it just mean that you'll continue on the one 93 million
project or you'll look at different ideas as West said?
Yes.
Yeah, whatever direction, sorry
if the di the will of the council is to have, um,
options brought back, we need to work on that,
but I, we wouldn't progress matic design
until we've sorted out those options.
So the concept design that we have, it's kind of revisiting
and re-clarify that scope before we move forward ahead.
Well, that makes sense. Thank you.
And so I've been in South Portland since 1966.
I hear a lot of people saying nineties and stuff like that,
but, uh, uh, 66 was a long time ago too.
So, but anyway, I think I I, I know the, I know the majority
of the citizens of South Portland
and uh, I know the, uh, traditionalists
that have been here forever with me.
And, uh, I know there's no way in hell
that this will ever pass at a referendum.
And I believe that the, uh, I believe even Craig believes
that, um, and, uh,
and I'm not speaking for him, I'm just theorizing, I guess.
But it's very difficult for me to sit here who's been here
as long as I have and say, yeah, I want to send this
to the voters because, um, we're gonna go ahead
and spend hundreds of thousands of more dollars, uh,
for designs and everything.
And me sitting here knowing, yes, I want this project.
I was on the MCE three committee, Mahoney committee, uh,
you know, I really want this to happen
because I want Mahoney to always be that.
There was some guy out here who said TAs Mahal
and oh, whatever.
Oh, that guy back there.
So anyway, but my thing is, is Mahoney is important piece
of history in the city, uh, in the city of South Portland.
Uh, you know, my mom went to high school there.
I went to elementary, middle school there.
My children went to middle school there.
So it's very difficult to sit here
and say, yeah, I want that to stay there,
and I want it to be a piece of the thing,
but I don't want to put people out of their homes either.
You know, I can look at certain people here right now
who will say, Dick, please don't do this because,
and I'm looking at three of 'em right now that are saying,
please don't do this because we can't afford, you know,
another 1100
or on top of the Pearl Street, $1,500 a year on,
uh, on taxes.
I'm not even sure I can, I'll have to ask my wife.
So, but, uh, I might have
to build a compound up in Ripley, Maine, who knows?
Um, but anyway, I'm going to take a chance
and say tonight I'm not sending it to the voters.
I wanna make that perfectly clear.
I want the design team to continue,
but I'm not right now, if we had to send it
to the voters right now, I do not support it at
all remotely.
No. But come June
or July when we have to make that decision,
if nothing's changed, if the price hasn't changed,
if the plans haven't changed, I'm not,
there's no way I'll send it to the, uh, voters.
But currently right now, I would like it to continue
to move forward, uh, and see what we can come up with.
I'm hoping that Ellen comes up with this magical, uh,
fundraising thing or whatever.
And, uh, maybe we can sell bricks.
Oh, we can put names on bricks of the building.
So, uh, anyway, so that's my thought.
I'm going to say let's move forward,
but I will not send it to the voters
as if things don't change.
Jake, you can't do that. It's just good money.
I'll Council pride, please.
I'll, yeah, I'll, I'll try and keep it short.
Um, I also want to thank the committee
and everyone who's worked so hard on this, um, you know,
they're, it's so difficult.
I really want to be able to support this,
but I have to agree with a couple of my fellow counselors
that the price tag is just too high.
Um, I, I,
I remember, I think it was a conversation I had with, uh,
the city manager that that brought about the,
the library potentially being moved.
And so it's really a struggle.
It's a struggle for me to not want that.
But I, I, I tend to agree with Councilor West.
I mean, I think if we can see a bare bones approach
that moves city facilities, city,
city departments under the same roof, I think, you know,
if I, I, you know, I've seen the buildings, the police
and fire in, and, you know,
the fire station is a 1950s fire station,
and if you go in there, it's still a 1950s fire station.
Um, and that's not acceptable to me either.
But what Councilor West said about, um, about,
you know, if we move police and renovate fire
and then we have Mahoney never get renovated, um,
that that is a problem.
Uh, and I came to the same conclusion.
So I think if we're gonna start this, we are gonna start,
or I would support starting with the reimagining of Mahoney,
but really building it in such a way that it is
utilitarian Spartan.
Um, you know, a rooftop garden isn't really in the cards.
I think, um, we'd all love to have that,
but a million dollars added to the price tag, I,
I just don't think it's, it's something that we can afford.
It's a want, not, not a need.
Um, so I think we need, we need
to take a utilitarian approach to how,
what Mahoney becomes.
I think that yes, it's gonna cost money to, to
renovate and put all the departments in the same place,
but there'll also be some cost savings
by having the departments all located in the same building.
So, you know, if, if we accomplish that goal alone
over time, you know, we will see a benefit.
But, um, we don't need to do more than that.
And I don't think voters will support us
doing more than that at this point.
So, um, really, you know, that,
that also enters in my calculus.
Sending a bond of 193 is just not,
almost $200 million is just not realistic.
I, I just don't think people are gonna support that.
Can I ask you for some clarification on your
thoughts? Sure. So
You, You, you are saying that, so are you asking
this group to go back and create that?
Yeah. Okay. So you, uh, so you are in favor
of moving forward right now?
Yes. As are you or not?
Yes. Can we have a discussion
or do you wanna hear from all counselors first on,
We've heard from everyone except Counselor
Coleman yourself.
Um, and my me
and, um, so let's just get back to the next layer.
Um, I'll speak now in that, uh, I, I know
that $194 million bond is not going
to be we, and we are gonna still have a problem.
Uh, it it, it needs to be done in pieces. It really does.
And if we do work on Mahoney first,
which is an empty building,
and bad things happen when you have a building empty
and it needs, we need to do something there first
and that will free up three buildings
and then that may generate more money.
I'm really was really disheartened to hear Chris Kessler say
that a change in the state, uh, constitution
to allow the taxes that we need
to support this is not gonna happen in our near future.
And I'm really concerned
with what's happening at the federal level
where monies are going to be available.
Um, these are hard times.
I am, am, um, being realistic.
I don't know when they're going to change,
but I mean, we've lost a lot as far
as goodwill in the world at this time,
and I don't think three
or four years is going to make a difference.
Um, and I really urge everyone to, um,
take advantage of the last meeting
that Mahoney committee did.
I was so impressed with their professionalism
and, uh, I was kind of in shock at the cost
that everyone was and still is.
But when the person who was the secretary,
and I'm sorry I can't remember her name, summed up
that each individual project, fire police,
Mahoney, and the library taken individually were all within
the expectations for that project.
It made it seem a reasonable price for five projects,
but we can't, we can't afford that.
I'm an extremely risk adverse,
a fiscally responsible person in my own economy,
and I am definitely in need rather than a want person
that a Honda fit when I could afford more.
Okay. Because it's functional, it meets my needs
and it's got great gas mileage
and I'm going to drive it till it dies,
even though I would like an electric or hybrid.
Um, and so I would like the design team to look at,
oh, and we need, I mean, it's not the, the fire department
and the police department.
I went through that building and I worked next to it.
I loved having the police station
and the fire station next to me.
I felt safe. I worked the 11 to seven shift a lot.
But during the day, the building at that time was open.
And believe me, there were, there are characters around here
that are, uh, you can tell they're,
they aren't taking their meds.
Um, and
I hope, I hope you don't mean anyway in
the immediate vicinity. No,
Definitely.
She just kind of wandered in. Okay. Um, in a fancy.
Alright, well we seem to be going
beyond the scope of the question. Just going to say,
Yes, we need to have a more managed project before taking,
because I mean, it's like, I, I was aware of
what the bond issue well is going to be
for the Pearl Street station
and we've got a lot more need than we have money.
Okay. Thank you Councilor Coleman. Thank you very much.
And Honda, thanks you all so much.
Um, okay.
Well, um, I'd like to be not real long
and somewhat coherent.
Um, I do just wanna underscore that any,
what we have heard over
and again is that folks who, some of our residents
who have said, I don't believe we need a new fire station
or a new police station, have become convinced
after touring these facilities
and that they, that we need to do something
and that the current spaces are outdated
and they are sometimes unhealthy and not pleasant.
And we are asking, um, our public safety staff
to work somewhere that, um, is not as safe
as it should be for them
and not as
efficient in providing the rest of us with service.
So I, I think that's important to acknowledge.
Um, meanwhile on the questions at well,
and also just I'll back up one more second.
I said that about our public safety staff, our, um,
city hall staff and our facility staff are, um, also in need
of modern facilities that they can rely on
and that, um, can support their best work.
And they really do not have those at this time.
So back
to the questions confirming whether I support the
recommended conceptual plans, I see these plans
and I think wow.
And I imagine the residents now
and in the future having, taking advantage of
what has been presented to us, um, when they're coming to,
um, access city services,
when they may be taking in a little performance in the
auditorium, when they're going to, um, some kind of,
you know, kids or adult sports, um, activity in the gym.
Um, I'm imagining them, sure.
I'm imagining 'em on that rooftop garden.
And, um, and I'm thinking, wow, south Portland
of the future, I wanna live long enough to enjoy it.
So I really love that plan.
Um, what I am hearing from the council is
not enough to make me feel that saying
that's the only plan is going to be a successful way of,
uh, going forward.
So, um, what I am thinking about is
that we can't,
after years of planning this, say right now tonight,
we've got all the answers and it's a whole new thing.
And this is what it is. We can say that we will continue
to have discussion about Mahoney on our
regular business agendas.
We also could schedule another workshop
to have a little bit more time.
In the meantime, though, it does sound as if most
of the council favors, um, putting this,
the concept plan back out there out there to whom
I do not favor it going just to, at this point,
two counselors as a subcommittee working
with the architect only.
We have an entire Mahoney committee in place
and we had charged them with coming up with proposing
to us what they've done.
Um, the, the proposal they thought would work best.
I don't think that means that the committee is incapable
of coming up with a different proposal.
They would be, especially, I think more enabled if we
tried to give them a number.
Does this council think in the next month
or two with discussion that we,
or even in the next month, if we wanna kick it back
to the committee, we are gonna say, 1 94 doesn't work,
what can you do with one 20 or something like that?
That isn't something that we have discussed in that way,
but it seems like a possibility to consider.
Um, in the meantime, I certainly agree
and I have for a while, that we need a more cohesive plan
of exactly what we mean by, um, we will make use
of the other buildings.
Doing both of these things at once feels difficult,
perhaps not impossible to at least get
that teased out a little bit more comprehensively.
I said I wouldn't talk for forever, so I think I'm going
to stop there.
Um, and then I think you also wanna ask
each other some more questions. Counselor Walker,
Um, if we, if we send this back to the committee
to rephrase it, you know, re rephrase
and rephrase the entire project, are we at risk
of missing the 2026 referendum?
Likely, but Correct. It depends on what the ask is,
but it, it's, it's possible.
So do you have anything you want to,
It depends on what gas.
So, um,
It, we, we've, if we're, um, we have, it's a,
it's a, uh, I use the train analogy a lot,
but I'm gonna use a ship analogy.
We're moving and to change course, it's,
it takes some time with all the parts and pieces.
So the more direction telling us which way you want the ship
to go, we can answer
that question down the road if it's similar to what we have,
but to scale back across all the projects
or if we're eliminating projects
and can focus on a couple of the projects
that bring forward, that, that gives us a better chance
to be ready for a referendum.
We're bringing all of 'em
and they're all modifying than it hurts the chances
of being comfortable with what we're presenting in June.
But if, if using, uh, councilor West's topics, you know,
if they ask us to focus on Mahoney, uh,
those three scenarios with the library, without the library
and this bare bone, that's a, an easy, easier task
to focus on versus looking at that,
looking at finding a new site for police
or configuring police and Mahoney or police
and fire again to get, if that's even one of the options.
I, I don't think we heard that,
but, um, so hopefully that helps answers the question.
I dunno if I answered my own question.
It's the classic lawyer response. I
Mean that All right. I, the
Jim Theater.
Yeah, the, I guess the gym theater is, is
There, if there's any direction on how you want us to
consider that.
I, I didn't hear any comments saying
that we should get rid of that as part of the project.
So the presumption would be they remain,
but if, if that's something that we should revisit,
that would be helpful guidance.
Can we put it on the revisit list? Will that work? Yes.
I see. I'm sorry.
Counselor West had her hand up first. Thank you.
I I didn't hear anyone on the council say
that we should revisit, revisit the auditorium
and the public space.
Jim, I think that it's the view of the council
that we want those spaces to be part
of the project and to serve the public.
If anybody else disagrees with me, let's, maybe we just deal
with that one issue and we can give guidance to the staff.
Right. Nobody is, everyone's on board with that. Right.
Can we do a show of hands who is keeping
that auditorium in?
Jim?
It does. And, okay. Okay. Can
I make a comment? Sorry.
Yes. Hang on for one second.
Counselor West, counselor Scott,
I, I'm not in favor of changing the
concept that we keep them.
I think what I would like to understand is
what are the components of the current cost estimations
that upgrade those facilities?
And is that an absolute that we need to do now?
Or can we at some point say, Hey, is somebody willing
to put their name on the auditorium
and fund a $5 million auditorium upgrade?
And we're there. So that's my sort of bare bones of like, I,
I think the concept is good.
I wanna keep them, I don't know that we need
to add 1,000,005 million to the cost of Mahoney
to make them better.
That that's my nuanced Jim
auditorium approach, and then I
Raise, we include that.
Okay. And top then, the reason I suggested the
approach that I said in my remarks,
which I can quickly repeat it,
and to come back in February with these three options
for Mahoney and to let counselor Scott
and myself work with the design team, is to try
to keep the thing on track so that we don't have to
notice a meeting and have meetings
and everything that I think we have got to look at the,
the proposal for Mahoney as it is how much
that would cost the proposal
for Mahoney without the library.
And I will add that if we wanted a successful bond issue in
this community, there are a lot of people who believe
that existing library building should stay.
I, I, uh, because of the mid-century modern
and all that stuff, and I, I don't even want to go into that
with all of you who think that the mid-century
modern building is so gorgeous.
I'm just a fiscally prudent person
that thinks the library fills, fulfills its function
and we don't have the resource to do it now.
And then the really fiscally prudent person is way over
there and she's the bare bones person.
So that's why to try to keep it on track.
I, I'm proposing that we look at that,
I really would urge the council don't have our, don't,
let's just not spend money
that is gonna be end up public dollars that are being spent.
You, I have asked so many people in the community,
what would you be willing to vote for?
How much more tax would you be willing to pay a year
to fund this project?
And nobody is coming up with anywhere near voting. Yes.
For, uh, 196 is out. I would say 120 is out.
And we would be very lucky to even get approval
of an $80 million bond issue.
So, um, we've got to be, we have
to be practical about dollars and cents.
We're spending public dollars here, so let's try
to get some money and figure out how we can make this work.
Then over the longer term, if we can get Mahoney done,
then we have two pieces of property we can sell or lease
or whatever we're gonna do so that we can get money
that will really help us do the public safety buildings
at much less cost.
Counselor Walker, just give her a chance.
Um, I, I think regardless of where we land, we need
to walk away from tonight with very clear direction
to the project team and the committee
because I, I fear for what
waiting a whole nother year would do
to the cost of this project.
Mm-hmm. And so I wanna make sure that regardless of, of
where we go, we, we, this isn't a, okay, well,
we'll revisit it and talk about it at another meeting.
Like I know it's late,
but I, I, I agree with Counselor West, like, we need
to be expedient about this.
What does expedient
Look like to you that we leave tonight with a decision?
I mean, everybody knows where I stand.
I am the only one, and that's fine.
But I, I think that we need to come to some sort
of consensus about what our desire is as a council.
Whether it's we, we talk about what we feel like a number
that could pass would be.
I, I think that no matter what number we put out there,
what we want a number to be
and what a number actually will be, regardless of
how fiscally prudent we are, is very different.
I think we would all like the member to be like 5 million
or less, but I think
that in reality we're gonna be looking at, you know, tens
of millions, if not over a hundred million dollars,
even if we pair everything way back.
But I think we have to come up with some sort of general
number to give the project team tonight so
that they have an idea of which to work with
to do the bare bones
Councilor Matthews.
So I just wanna make sure that certain people heard
what I said, that I will not support this project
without changes.
So what I'm saying is, we are charged tonight
with saying, are we going to allow this team to move forward
with some direction?
That's what I was trying to get across.
I said, I would not move this forward at this price without
changes and improvements.
So even your idea working, you two, working together
with that team is still going to have them moving forward
and taking money from the funds that we're paying them from.
So that's what I'm saying.
Our, our direction tonight is just,
are we moving them forward?
Whether it's full ball with, uh, changes
with the bare minimum.
I just wanna make sure that I'm
with Councilor Walker saying, okay,
are we moving them forward and coming back in June
and giving us some type of bare minimum or,
and if, if you want to walk work
with the group, so be it
Councilor West, I just
wanna make it clear to everybody.
If someone gives me a winning Powerball ticket between now
and June, I would for sure go
with the proposal from the committee.
I mean, I have no problem
It is simply the dollars that are involved.
So where I think we go tonight, I, I think we have to say,
look, we cannot do the police, the fire
and Mahoney for less than quite a bit.
I mean, look it, do you really think the voters in this town
will approve a hundred million dollar bond issue
in the fall?
No. If the answer is no, then let's cut the project.
We have to say there is no way we can do all that
for even a hundred million.
So if we are, if we're not gonna, let's be practical
and let's be organized and focused.
If we can't do that, how can we cut it?
Well, we could either go with the public safety side
or we could go with the pony side.
What do people think? And I explain my views
of why I think we go with the Mahoney side.
Okay. So if that is a, uh, agreeable
or people agree with my rationale, then we say, okay,
let's look at the Mahoney side.
Now what is it about the Mahoney side?
Well, I mean, I made the point we look at, we need them
to come back and tell us this is
what Mahoney would cost per version one, per the committee.
Then there were ways of trying
to cut back on Mahoney so we could less.
And so at that point, we get those numbers
and that helps get us a bit of a focus.
All right, are we gonna go this way
with Mahoney version one?
Are we gonna go Mahoney without the library?
Are we gonna go Mahoney bare bones?
And at that point we spend more money,
but we stop spending money on the police
and fire right now so that we can have a focused
proposal that has a prayer of chance, a prayer
of passing in in the fall.
I mean, one, as one of the letters said it's better
to have half a cake than no cake at all.
Yep. The whole damn cake is,
I keep seeing if you're gonna No, not yet.
Okay. Counselor Scott.
So I think my thought here around expediency is
that we need to sort of move quickly, be nimble
and provide feedback on the fly.
And that is very challenging
to do in this sort of workshop setting.
And I liken this to, so a million years ago when I was doing
affordable housing redevelopment,
we would say, this is what we wanna do.
The EPC firm,
the engineering procurement construction firm would come
back with their budget and we would all sit down at a table
for four hours and we'd value engineer everything.
We can't do that. This gotta be cheaper.
This gotta be the, there's no specific budget number.
It was just like, can we shave 10% off this budget?
How do we work together to get that done?
And I feel like that as our, as a project developer,
that would be an expedient way to get some
of those answers back to the city.
That's work that's already been done.
You're just pulling apart numbers.
But it needs to happen sort of quickly, efficiently,
just like full on brainstorm.
Nobody leaves a secure location until there's some answers.
And we come back to the city council
That, That's my thought.
And I, I'll stop talking because I,
For clarifi for clarification and
Entertainment. So
For clarification, counselor Scott,
is this expedient process, what counselor to you,
what Counselor West is suggesting
as a two person subcommittee?
Yeah, I don't know what the structure is
and I'm happy to have it incorporate folks from the Mahoney
committee if that's helpful.
I just, I think it needs to be like a,
So there are a couple of, okay.
I, I find myself having str wanting
to, um, remember
that the mayor is really just sort
of a facilitator in these things
and that I need to remember that.
But I also find myself having some strong feelings
around the idea that we have approximately forever
called this project a community project.
We have put together a committee
that represents our community
and we have said that that is the committee that is tasked
with planning this community led project.
And so for us to then say,
well actually only two counselors will be making some rather
important decisions working with, um, one
of the consultant groups feels
not comfortable to me.
Um, I also would remind you that a two person council
or committee had all of its meetings must be open
to the public and, um, and must be posted.
So if that gets in the way of what you're both thinking
of expedience, just remember that.
And maybe it does not.
No it doesn't. And we're, it was just to get some data
to come back to this decision making body as soon as we can,
which means next month so that you can make some decisions
to focus the project and keep it moving.
And why, is it
because I'm also concerned about public perception?
I am. And whether the perception of the public might be that
the way they thought this would be planned is actually not
the way it's being planned.
Just I'm just putting that out there. But, um, oh God.
Now I lost track. I lost the thread. Darn it.
Say the last thing you said, Natalie, please.
I said that I think maybe you don't even need a count.
Maybe you don't need counselors involved.
Maybe the design team got enough direction tonight
to know what we're, you know what
I'm talking about.
We doing that, that I was asking you my turn. Alright.
So Counselor pride, if you agree
with that, would you like to say more?
Yeah, I mean, I think, um, you know, when it comes
to speed and agility and,
and knowing, you know, what's gonna save us money
and what's not, I am comfortable leaving it in the hands
of the experts if they hear it.
I, I'm hoping, and,
and maybe they have to answer this question
that if we say we would like a bare bones, you know,
no library approach to Mahoney that consolidates, um, city,
uh, committees, we'd like that to see that with,
or city, sorry, city departments.
We'd like to see that with an update
to the gym and auditorium.
And we'd like to see that without an update
We'd like to see that with the library
and without the library.
Um, and, and seeing, I mean, I don't how, I don't know
how quickly you can get those kind
of numbers together based on the work you've already done.
Are there, if, if we pull one thread,
are we unraveling the whole thing?
Or are you able to just sort of go back and,
and take the work you've done
and strip it down the pieces that you know, you,
you might find extraneous if you were aiming at the kind
of target we're aiming at?
Yes. I guess, um, I guess the part
for us is there was a clear direction of what to provide
for this project and you don't like the direction,
so we need to change those parameters.
For example, and I, Julie's not here and she'd kill me,
but one climate future is a goal.
If you're saying that's not a goal
that changes project priorities.
And so I'm hearing we have free reign
to make those assumptions on your behalf
to break up the project a la carte to some format
that we can tell you what you can,
what our guiding principles, what we meet
and what we don't meet that we can cross off
and say for this,
you will not get all your guiding principles
and that may be the direct, the will of the council.
So it's kind of hard, as I said, the ship is moving,
but we can break down numbers all day long.
But they'll be with, um,
with Council Maths Matthews, um, in my ear saying
assumptions and unknowns, we're gonna be compounding that
because we are making major assumptions just on numbers.
But that may be better than where we are today.
And, and again, an a la carte menu of items, if
that's the direction we can do that,
it just isn't the charge of meeting all the goals
that we were hired to do.
So we, and again, I don't know if I,
I'd just like to clarify that I love the product Yes.
That you brought to us. Oh yes.
I mean, I'm, I mean, I'm very pleased with,
with what you brought to us.
I'm really not pleased with the, with the price tag.
And that's really the sole reason why, um,
I think we're all sort of turning to another meeting.
We have very thin skin.
We understand this is a bad situation.
We're just trying to give you direction.
We're trying to get a little from you, you as well.
Something to add. Yeah.
So, um, I've been taking in all the scenarios
that we've been discussing the last few minutes,
and I think, um, I think we do have a sense of, you know,
reading through the tea leaves of where you want us to go.
And I think we can leave here tonight doing some of that.
And I think I'm gonna,
you gonna speak off the cuff a little bit,
but I, you know, if if, if Councilor West, if the,
if the a hundred million dollars benchmark just sitting
aside that for the moment is say unrealistic, I don't know.
But I suspect that that means that Mahoney
with a library is probably off the table, right?
Because just based on the numbers we've seen so far, um, uh,
Councilman Scott, I think you asked about,
you know, a bare bones approach.
I, again, I don't know, but I suspect there's not a lot
of daylight or difference between
what would be a bare bones quote unquote approach
and what we're proposing
because to use this building moving forward
requires most of all of that.
Anyway, I, again, I suspect, I don't know.
So, um, one thing we could potentially look at is, um,
separating the gym and theater wing.
So it's physically a separate building
and it's Not, uh, not used currently
and it's, it's renovated at a, at a later date that
that would be a significant move potentially, you know,
reduced the cost.
You're not getting rid of the theater in the gym,
but you're not tackling it right now.
Yeah. Um, that's something we could look at,
but, um, I think if, if the bare bones approach
is, uh, the direction we're given,
I think we can take and run with that.
But if, if a hundred million dollars is too much, I suspect
that a renovation of Mahoney
with a library is probably not gonna get there.
Okay. So
I'd like, I'd like to make a, a suggestion.
Um, we have a Mahoney committee meeting on
the books for the 24th.
Mm-hmm. And if the design team thinks that they can come up
with, you know, a few different scenarios
that incorporate the direction
that you are taking from us tonight, um, I think that
that would be a good place for us
to go is have the design team take the notes from us this
evening, put together a recommendation, bring it back
to the committee, because I agree with Counselor Tipton, the
Mayor Tipton, so sorry, um, that the,
the committee really does represent the community
and that is, that should be our,
that should be the overall guiding principle
for our decision making is
the recommendation of that committee.
And if that committee agrees with the design team,
then we can come back to the council next month
with different numbers and a different project.
Thank you very much. Did
I say February 21st? I meant January,
January 27th. January 27th.
Just making updates
Close. I do that too.
Thank you. Um, councilor West.
So I think that's a reasonable approach.
Um, although I hope we'll come back with options, but, but
because Councilor Scott has this idea about bare bones
and she is very knowledgeable
and there is nobody from district
one on the committee right now.
Maybe we could just let her be part
of the committee from district one to kind
of communicate your thoughts more to the committee.
Can I attend though? Yes.
Yeah, because you'll put you as a rep, right?
Because there's no supposed to mean as a No, I
Mean, as a public citizen, am I still allowed
to be public citizen?
Yeah, but you can also be a member, but in order to
Comment you have to be a member.
Yeah. Yeah.
I mean I just think her, she has a different concept than
any of the rest of us and I think it should be
somehow considered.
I don't think anyone actually gonna like my concept.
No, go for it.
You'd be surprised. I,
our clerk isn't here
and she possibly would have some, um,
contribution she would like to make since this is a
committee and since she is the one tasked, um,
with the maintenance I, I guess of, I would say
of our committees, um, I do know you're right
that that seat is open.
I do know that we have an applicant for that seat
Councilor Scott has seen the applicant.
Um, so I, I don't think we need
to make that decision at this time.
And I also admire Councilor West
that you are saying if we have a good resource, let's,
let's make sure that, you know, we take advantage of that.
I'll be there. We're gonna call you
the resource from now on.
It's not the 24th, it's the 27th.
Lord help us. Can we agree? So
Go, go ahead. No, go ahead.
Can we agree as a council
recognizing the fi financial constraints to ask the team not
to do anything more on the police
and fire until the matter comes back to us?
Yes.
Agree with that. I let's not incur any more costs
because the reality of it is, I think there's enough of us
that realize the dollars
and cents involved for trying to do all
of these at one time are just too great, too much.
So when you are asking though the consultants to come back
and give us some ideas of a different configuration
and how that would be cost saving, are you asking them,
I mean the police and fire thing
is pretty integral right now.
Are you what? It sounds like you're asking them
to set it aside.
I am, yes. Because we're talking about,
only talking about Mahoney.
Mahoney, the Mahoney building itself.
Okay. I agree with that. Yeah.
Do we have other counselors that agree with that request?
Yes. Yes. Okay. I'm fine.
You can ask for hands.
Not really. We're not supposed to vote in workshop.
Well, I would just say I'm not certain I agree with
that request, but I have seen some shaking heads here.
So, um, okay. Where are we? Who are we, how did we get here?
Um, alright,
I'm Counselor Walker.
Sorry if, um, if we are charging the,
I'm gonna bang this, come on. I'm just wing to bang
Guys. Sure. Hang.
Um, if we are charging the, the design team
and the Mahoney committee with coming up
with different options that are just focused on Mahoney,
can I please just ask that we do look at
what it would cost if we had the library in there as well?
I mean, if they're gonna be doing the numbers
anyways, I'm just, that was
Part of Yeah, We heard.
I I don't wanna just throw that out Right.
Without knowing for sure.
And can I just clarify, I assume I assume
e even though it would change things because I understand
and and agree with the premise
that if we build PD on the site
and then Mahoney never passes,
that causes a whole bunch of problems.
Is there not a scenario though, where the group comes back
and says, Hey, here's what would happen if we did police
and fire first and Mahoney later.
Is the, are you just all not wanting
to entertain that scenario?
Like if, hey, we've got a new, hey, if we have to,
we'll put pd, I'm making this up at municipal services like
we had talked about or something.
Is that completely off the table? Yes. Would this
Wait, sorry. I feel like you just asked
two different things about
on the table, off the table.
It, it was, there are, are we coming back
with only Mahoney an option to do Mahoney first
or would the council entertain coming back with, uh,
an option that does police and fire first and Mahoney later?
Scott, what I feel like I'm hearing is Counsel saying more
of an option to do Mahoney first.
Yeah, I, I heard that. I just want to make sure
because that it, it doesn't have to be tied
to police being at Mahoney if that was the concern
of not doing that first.
So I just wanted to check and make sure,
because I know those two have the,
have the bigger needs, so mm-hmm.
Did you Sure. Come on down.
Hi, Dawn Hopkins, director of facilities for South Poland.
Um, I just wanted to let you guys know
as a facilities director that the police
and the fire are definitely the highest priority that need
to be taken care of first to, to redo Mahoney
and to do anything to Mahoney prior to, to thinking about
what we're gonna do to police and fire.
So kind of our stage approach was
to get the police over there in the Mahoney field while
we're doing site work at Mahoney,
and then be able to tear down the building there
and get that they definitely have more needs in city hall
library planning, maybe not assessing,
but, um, they're, they're the, they are the,
they're the worst condition the city has at this time.
So to just disregard that
and say we're gonna kick that down the road another four
or five years is, I feel is, is doing an injustice to the,
to the departments and all the staff that works over there.
I agree with what you're saying about Mahoney.
Take it down to a bare bones,
whether we pull the library out, keep it there.
We can certainly look at that, that project.
But that's, you know, $107 million in the police
and fire are, you know, in the seventies, seventies range.
So if we just put the police
and fire on the, on the bond, we'd be at an $80 million
or something to that effect back to
where we were over the 78 million I guess.
But, um, you know, to to, and we can, we can take,
and I like what you're saying,
bare bones don't do the gymnasium auditorium.
Now what are the things that we can take outta Mahoney?
You know, of course, you know, like, like Greg said,
Julie's not gonna be happier if we take the, the geothermal
and all the electrification now,
but we can certainly tighten those numbers up.
And I don't know what type of a bare bones, I mean, um,
when, when Carter and I toured Mahoney the other day,
she was asking, you know, how much did we have
to bring this building up to code?
And you know, that's another question for Craig and his team
and the design team to how much of that stuff do we do,
do we need to redo the foundation
before we can put city services in there?
But, but, uh, I just wanted to say that for, uh, police
and fire, you know, it, it, it would be a shame to put
that on the back burner. Thank,
Thank you very much.
Um, may I, may I just, I have two more things
that I, I didn't get to say.
Um, just two comments.
One, I get uncomfortable when our council
is saying, you know, our voters will never approve
a hundred million or our voters will never approve
79 million, or our voters will never approve.
I don't know what our voters will approve.
I think it's a little presumptuous of the council to say
that I think it's up to the voters
to approve what they approve.
So having made that grand statement, um,
I still don't think 194 million is gonna fly at this moment.
Um, and then the other thing I just wanted my own personal
comment about, um, the, you know, that,
that Julie's gonna be mad if we
take out the resilience planning.
I, I don't think it's just as simple as Julie will be met.
I think that the spirit of our upcoming comprehensive plan,
um, encourages resilience planning
and that that is something we also need to bear in mind.
So, okay. Oh, counselor Walker,
You said so much by just saying my name, um,
that I, I would like to amend my suggestion earlier then
to maybe put all of the phased approach prices on the table.
If police and safety, if police
and fire are the most critical needs,
I don't feel like we can just ignore it if
we're asking for different numbers.
I think that we should, what,
what are the six different ways we could chunk this out?
And then that goes to the Mahoney committee meeting
and then we're here
Councilor West. Uh,
It would be also useful as part of that if
to have the numbers on
what we get right now from leasing Mahoney for the sports
and what it's costing us and the carrying cost for Mahoney.
And if any of our consultants have opinions about,
if it's okay, the systems in Mahoney are kind
of turned down enough that it's okay
to leave the building empty and unused
or what your views are on that,
That's a problem. Yeah.
Okay. Anyone? I sit on my hands. Um,
Counselor Scott, I just wanna speak
to the energy component because
of all people I am the like most ridiculous,
let's do it all electric efficient, perfect, et cetera.
My bare bones is like bare bones
and then you do an energy analysis to see,
see if there's an appropriate ROI on a geothermal unit
that saves you costs to be able to pay for it.
And that is finance. So I'm just, I wanna be clear
that I am not like, let's go coal.
I'm just saying, I, I just, you know, we just housed
however many hundred kids in there several years ago.
Like I think it's fine.
So, sorry, I know that's unpopular
and I'm not saying to to like park the police
and fire for a second for forever or like move it around.
I'm just saying like, let's,
let's see if we can get Mahoney into a quick cheap fix,
which I know you're saying that's completely crazy.
You move everybody into there
and then you have these options to actually afford the next,
you know, the next piece.
So this is not like I wanna do the city hall first
because I'm a city counselor.
It's like, this is, if there is an easy, quick, cheap option
'cause there always are.
Let's see if that's available
and then we Keep the ship going.
Okay. I I think I got that.
I'm getting a little brain weary.
I admit I, we need to put into words
for our city manager
and for our team what we are actually asking for.
I'll, I'm gonna foolishly try to make that happen.
It sounds as if we are asking for the design team
to go to present some
reconfigured ideas to the full Mahoney committee by the time
of this meeting on the 27th where it sounded
a little, I, at this point I'm thinking 50 50 is whether
that new thinking includes police and fire.
I will say that this counselor very much supports it,
including police and fire.
This counselor does Too,
as does Counselor Walker. Yes.
I think what the direction is,
can you discuss various phasing options
with the committee?
So phasing is one thing.
The second topic is Mahoney itself.
What are some alternative approaches with the Mahoney?
Mahoney as it was proposed
and came to us tonight, Mahoney was out the library
and Mahoney bare bones
that Councilor Scott is gonna help work on.
That's the new bumper sticker. Okay.
Whispering her public comment.
But I, but I do wanna say I personally don't support bare
bones being no auditorium
and no Jim, I just think though,
if we're gonna do Mahoney at all, it's important
to do something at the beginning, at the outset so
that our community can have a facility.
It sounds just, sounds a tiny, excuse me,
a little bit like we're saying refigure things,
but don't do anything different, just a tiny little bit.
So I think we have to be open
for some real re reconfiguring.
Anyone else? Yes, yes, yes.
And also, excuse me, I wanna say thank you counselor West.
'cause I think that your phrasing of, um,
phasing plus, um, fairly major changes
to Mahoney itself is what we're asking for.
So
My only thought on the bare bones of the police
and fires, I don't think there's a bare bones
that I can clearly see.
Like I think that they need facilities.
I I don't question that.
So I think those are like distinct packages
that I wouldn't ask the design team to like draw back.
Like I walked through Mahoney
and I was like, I could paint this up a little bit.
We'd be set,
You can kick me off anytime.
Actually the committee's scope doesn't include the public
safety anyway.
Perfect. So yeah, the, the phasing was a phasing
and the other thing was just Mahoney,
I am done Now I'm falling down the rabbit hole
of looking at what the scope said,
but I, I'll take your word for it.
This in this moment. Yeah.
It didn't include, okay, it only included public safety
to the extent that, you know, where might,
where might the PD go on the Mahoney site?
But that was it, it wasn't about the programming
and it wasn't about the fire station at all.
Okay. Okay. I don't see any hands raised.
Do you feel, Scott, that you have what you need
and that there is hope in our universe?
I I do. As long as Craig
and, uh, Colliers does, I I still was,
I didn't necessarily hear though, other than two counselors,
maybe three say that.
Um, I know that work doesn't need to be presented on police
and fire, but in some ways, you know, it,
we just wanna make sure it is a possible recommendation even
though it's not within the charge of M three C to come back
and say, here's what would happen if we did police
and fire now and Mahoney later.
Or is that, I I didn't get the sense
of majority if you wanted to hear that.
So that wouldn't be something necessarily
that we'd come back with.
I, I'm with Skip. I think that is, I I think
that would be helpful to present
to you all given the needs of those facilities.
But at the same time, we also want to deliver
what it is this council's looking for.
I, I'll support that. Okay.
Natalie's, I see a confused face there.
I see hand there. What do I go with with trying sit on
Not to look at No, no, no. It's
not Other sites don't, yeah.
Not to, not to look at other sites,
but just to hear, I just looked at the clock.
A phased approach. Just almost exactly
what you said, uh, Mr.
City manager, not to look at other sites,
but just what does it look like to do the police
and fire first versus waiting on it?
I mean, I I how about them?
I feel for them I really, really do.
I've seen those buildings. I I get it.
And I think I said that in my comments before.
Um, it's just, you know, I I as a phased approach,
you know what, what order
of the phases go in is something we could review.
If that's something that's simple enough
for you to, to mock up.
'cause we're not really talking about
as Councillor Scott said, um, doing a, um, you know,
a bare bones fire and a bare bones police.
Yes, please. But I do think we're
gonna start to wrap this up.
Yes. Tony de Lucio from colors.
I just wanted to remind everybody that in the presentation
that was sent there is phasing options
and one of the options that we looked at that's outlined in
that slide is do we do essential buildings first?
So the worst first police, fire
and let Mahoney take its own schedule separate
or do we really do as in the preferred option, which is
what had been come out of the, the workshop process is
that we do Mahoney, the police station at the same time
and then fire follows on.
Mm-hmm. So if you look at that document, you will see we've
outlined some phasing for you to consider.
And which document was that? I missed it.
It's in your presentation that was issued. It's
In the slides. There's
one slide on that's on here. Oh, slide.
Yeah, just that slide though.
Yeah, but it's got four options on it. Right.
Okay. But the cost estimate was not
one of the options, right?
Yep.
Alright. I feels that we've gotten somewhere
that you have some direction
that you folks have some direction.
Um, and I do think that we need to
perhaps bring this part of the workshop to a close.
Everybody okay with that? Okay.
It being 10 15, it seems
that our next decision would be whether
to take the housing ordinance updates at this time.
Um,
Oops. I think we're
also gonna say
goodbye to a fair amount of people. Oh, ma
Lawn. He's right there.
Like I'm seeing,
Seeing puppy dog eyes From Mark.
Hey folks,
Could you just sort of exit kind of quickly and quietly
and show the rest of us some mercy?
Can I do show of who? Who?
Okay. Right next to the city office.
Oh, here comes He. Where
Was he hiding?
May be excused to go to the restroom.
Yes. Oh. Although you know what
Counselors Got. Could
you stay for one second?
Unless it's gonna be really desperate.
Um, counselors, counselors, counselors, counselors,
counselor West included.
Um, Can we maybe by a show of hands,
who thinks it might make more sense to postpone,
even though we're very sorry, the housing ordinance updates?
Can we see a show of hands? Who would,
How long is it expected to take?
Mm. A it's full on.
I Did you see the
I Well we are also asked to, we're asked
to hear the presentation, understand what it means,
and make answer some questions based on the presentation.
Having said that, Milan,
would you tell us how long it's going take?
Um, Milan invited the planning director.
Uh, we have four questions for you.
I think I would just focus on three of them,
which are a little bit more, uh, simple, uh, to address.
And maybe then we can kind of split the difference
and tackle the more media one at a later meeting.
Uh, but I, I think we can present in maybe 10 minutes.
You think you can, this Lies,
I know you Milan order that
Doesn't count for us the 10 minutes,
So we need set the clock.
Alright, Milan, we're timing you baby.
Um, no, I, I don't, this is exactly what I don't want to do.
I don't want to give it short shrift. It's important stuff.
So in all seriousness, do we need to postpone?
I don't really think we're gonna be done in 10 minutes if
we do with thorough job.
Yeah, no, I think his presentation will be 10 minutes
and then it'll be up to you
how long you feel like you need to debate.
So Yeah,
I it doesn't feel like a great idea.
I mean, this is a lot of stuff.
States made a lot of changes.
There's a lot of implications ahead.
I think council should actually understand
what you're saying before we give you feedback other
than we wanna go home.
All right. If, does anyone object strenuously
to not hearing this presentation right now?
What you asking Councilor? Matthew, what you us few
To postponing The,
I don't want to hear it, but whatever
I let, I'm sorry,
but I'm just gonna say we're postponing this presentation.
It feels too important to just
I'm just kidding. I I would
hear it. Whoa.
Thank you. All right. But thank, thank you very much.
I am sorry. Planning for, okay,
so now let's give, should we give counselors Scott
moment to come back?
Wow. This is a fun one everyone.
Um, well maybe we can,
I think Councilor Scott understands the workshop requests,
so maybe we can get going with counselor with,
excuse me, with the request.
So we're moving to proposed workshop discussion
and the first one is, um, adding Central Fire Station
to the inventory of archeological and historical resources.
And that is coming, the request is coming from the Historic
Preservation Committee
and I believe you're going to represent the committee.
You're right. And, and I didn't speak in the public sector
in this public hearing the last time as part
of the historic committee.
So, and please give your name
and how you're part of the committee.
My name is Peter Kellen
and I'm on the, uh, city Historic Preservation Committee.
Uh, the committee voted in August of this year of last year,
2025 to request a workshop with counsel to review the merits
of placing Central fire station located at 6 84 Broadway on
the south boil inventory of archeological
and historic resources built in 19 54 55 per cost
of 220,000.
This building was designed in Art Deco style
by Robert Armitage and built by f David Cunningham and Sons.
The building is building at the corner of Broadway
and Antoine's replaced the central fire
station on Thomas Street.
The committee has been informed
by the Mahoney City Center design team
that there is consideration of the complete demolition
of the fire station in order
to construct a new fire station at this site.
While the HPC strongly supports our fire department, part
of our committee's responsibility is
to support the preservation, rehabilitation,
and restoration of South Portland's notable buildings.
Central fire stations certainly chose that.
Bill is a beautiful historic building in a highly visible
location and it anchors that corner.
The existing fire station gives residents a sense of place
and history and is worthy of preservation.
Our committee is charged
to assist the city council in preserving the historic
and architectural integrity of South PO
and make recommendations
that assure the city projects enhance the historic qualities
of identified historic properties.
When this is feasible
and appropriate, we request as a, as a committee
that this city does not demolish the original 1955
fire station building.
Therefore, for reasons previously stated,
the Historic Preservation Committee is requesting the
workshop to add the Central fire station located at 6 84
Broadway to the Southport Inventory of archeological
and Historic Resources.
Thank you for your time and consideration.
Thank you very much. So we have heard the request,
the propo for a workshop.
Um, we're going to need three counselors
to support this proposed workshop.
And I think the only, well,
we also, counselors can ask a question about the workshop
proposal if you do have a question,
but we do not discuss the proposal.
Is there anyone who has a question?
Okay. Um, we're a little punchy at this point.
I'm sorry, counselor Scott, what is your question?
And you may need to return. Yeah.
Oh, well it may not be a question for this.
I was wondering if the Mahoney committee had discussed
or had any sort of charge
or work in their long history of looking at that site,
or, sorry, the fire Oh.
'cause that wasn't part of their committee. Okay, thank you.
I answered my own question.
Well done Counselor Scott. Thank you.
Was there a question for the person requesting the workshop?
Yes. Counselor Walker,
Um, are is is your request just to have the,
sorry, I just hit me how late it is and I got tired.
Um, the, your, your ask is
to have the building be considered a historic preservation
building and not tear it down,
but we don't necessarily have
to keep the fire station itself in that building. All
Right. Just
make sure that your question is about the,
the proposal to have a workshop,
but is not a question meant to answer in a workshop.
I, I'm sorry. I guess Mike,
and maybe that's not the right question
or
Okay. I think I'm cut.
I I mean, I really don't wanna just cut you off,
but it's maybe the questions I think are more about
the necessity for the
Workshop is the, is the ask for the workshop
to save the building itself,
not necessarily the use of the building.
If it failed to, if it ceases
to become a central fire station,
A I wonder why it would have
to be torn down if it ceases to be there.
And b, even if
the building itself has characteristics of a fire station,
but also has long lasting architectural characteristics
that give it a sense of place, we want the bill, we would
like to make sure that all everything's considered in
the value of that building
as a historic resource for the city of.
Okay. So thanks. It sounds like the answer is it's about
the building, not the building's use.
But I think at this point, let's see if we have,
do we have support for the workshop?
I don't see any other questions. Do any other questions?
Alright, well, is there support for this workshop?
Counselor Walker, you're supporting the workshop.
I also will support the workshop.
Counselor West also will support the workshop.
You have three, we'll schedule this workshop. Thank you.
Thanks. Alright. The next workshop request.
Um, it's, it's worded as changing the dates
of off leash hours for dogs
and revising the ban on dog toys at Willard Beach.
Counselor Coleman, that is your workshop request.
Yes. And um, the ordinance was, um,
came into effect in the spring of, um,
2022.
And at that time, um, the community believed
that this would be revisited
and that was, oh, it, it definitely was, uh, during the time
of turmoil and also impacted by COVID and
however, um, living with this we've had,
it's been identified that the current change from
Memorial Day to Labor Day leaves, uh, a lot
of, of, excuse me.
They're asking again to go back to Memorial Day.
Labor Day as placing it May 1st
to September 30th.
Leaves the dog walkers
and we have a significant amount of senior people
and senior dogs in the dark.
So that is a safety concern and also quality of life.
And also allowing toys from Beach Street
to Fort Preble, which means
that they would not be allowed further inward where most
of the beach goers go.
And both of these issues are quality of life for dog owners
and dogs, particularly seniors, senior people,
and senior dogs.
Uh, it is very hard on the on on the body.
I'm tired too, um, on the musculoskeletal system
to be walking on paved road.
Whereas grass
and particularly beach is extremely beneficial for the dogs
and their owners to be walking on beach
and being able to throw a ball into the water
to promote dogs swimming, which really, uh,
increases Oh, their quality of life but also their health.
So I mean, as far as for all seniors, the things
that we do know for quality of life for people
and dogs is get out of the house, get outside outdoors,
and move in natural light.
And so much was lost during the pandemic.
And we wanted, again,
to promote the strong communities the seniors had
prior a pandemic.
And so this is a health issue, quality of life,
the importance of being able to walk on a non
paved service and to also swim in waters.
So that is their ask is to change from
what the ordinance says.
May 1st to September 30th, back
to Memorial Day, to Labor Day.
I have like all of the sunset hours if you need,
but I don't think people need to know that
'cause we have fewer people here and the people
who are here already know what the benefits are.
Um, there was one, um,
rules related issue, councilor Coleman that I think you,
you learned about relating to the workshop requests, um,
having to do with council's own rules in terms of,
and, and I would like you speak to,
but I think you were planning to say,
you had just mentioned that you had learned more about
how a, that it would have to be broader. That it
Would, it was Well, and,
and if, if we have a workshop, then it would open
to the public to express their concerns again.
And that's why I actually gave the initial spring letter
from 2024 when this
actually grieved population was pointing out
that they were living under these changes
and they had expected that there would be a, a reexamining
based on uh, what the parks
and recreations had found during the survey.
Mm-hmm. But opening it up also opens up for all the people
who don't believe that there are any dogs
that should be off leash on the beach at any time.
Yes. Thank you for explaining that. Yes.
And so just knowing our council rules would look at this
as a workshop that says it's regarding city policies
for dogs on Willard Beach.
So that we about these two issues, it would reopen
all the issues relating to dog policies on Willard Beach
by the council rules that say it's a broad topic.
So I just wanted to make sure that that is understood
'cause you had learned that
and discussed it with me slightly.
So.
And the, the fear is that
even though this is very restrictive
and not ideal, particularly for quality of life,
that it could be more restrictive.
Does anyone have questions for Councilor Coleman?
No questions. Alright.
Um, is there any, do we have counselors in support
of this workshop?
Proposal
Council Councilor Walker?
You're in support Councilor Coleman in support.
Do we have other counselors in support?
Hmm. It does not look like there are two counselors in
support, which is what you would need.
We, we only have two. Yeah, I mean two additional.
We don't have three so we don't,
it doesn't look like we have three.
Alright, well then this workshop request is failing.
It will not go forward. Alright, Mr.
City Manager, you were going to review workshop items
with us that are already scheduled.
Yeah, just quickly. The only, um, guidance I'm looking
for tonight, um, the,
the two items can be removed from the workshop list.
We just wanna make sure council's okay with that one.
A while back, the bike ped committee had asked
for workshop on acquiring land rights
to create a formal trail from Bonnie Brooks
Terrace to Dyer School.
Um, bikes reviewed that
and has asked for that to be removed.
And then, um,
initially we had thought maybe there would be another
workshop from the comprehensive plan
and discussing this with the mayor,
the same thing can be accomplished by having
the comp plan brought to the council for adoption.
Same public comment is allowed and council decisions
and at that time, council if they wanted to, could remand it
to another workshop or direct the comp plan committee
to do something different.
So it would almost be duplicative, um, to have a workshop.
So as long as council, uh, is okay with it, we plan to
remove those items.
Um, and then, um, uh, there are three other items
that are not yet ready to be presented.
Uh, dog Park,
although we're in the process
of now getting a consultant on board, uh,
that we've gotten some quotes that have been reviewed as,
um, I may have mentioned with, uh, one of the folks in, uh,
involved in this, uh, WA Wright Festival.
Still waiting on, um, feedback from the WA Wright family.
And then future use of city buildings obviously is tied
to your early discussion.
There are two other items, future use
of Willard Fire Station, an update on pay as you throw
that are both ready to be added to a specific date along
with the historic preservation item that was just added.
Um, if the council wanted to do that tonight, if not,
they'll remain on the awaited dates list.
Okay, thank you very much. Um, okay.
Um, does anyone want to at this point
suggest at all that one of those two pay as you throw
or historic preservation move onto the calendar
as soon as possible?
Or would you like us to just Scott
and I as we do for an agenda, come back
with a recommendation of when it's gonna fit.
Okay. Looks like when it's gonna fit is our winner.
Alright folks.
Well it's been an evening
and um, I think we can call this workshop adjourned.
We don't do round robin did you, you had something to say?
I had a question about the comprehensive plan being
removed as a workshop.
Mm-hmm. Does that mean that it's sort of an like
approve it?
I, I guess I thought there was sort of an iterative process
of council feedback,
Comprehensive plan.
I think there still will be that kind of a process.
What will happen is comprehensive plan committee,
when it gets to this point, which could be,
is predicted at this point to be, well we only have two,
there are two meetings scheduled.
They're both in February.
It is looking like the amount of public comment means
that there would need to be another meeting,
at least one other meeting in March.
Uh, after the Comprehensive Planning Committee
finishes working on the draft, it will then vote
to send the draft to council
and as an AGI agenda item, we will be able to discuss it.
We'll be able to hear public comment
and we'll be able to make our decision either to pass it
or to ask the committee for changes.
Okay. Thank you. That's helpful.
Question. Uh, will we, we are going
to be having the D-E-P-E-P-A report before,
I don't think that is his current schedule.
I think that we're hearing that
after we're hearing the next DEP report,
after we would already receive the comprehensive plan draft
so long as, as the comprehensive planning committee is
staying on its current schedule.
Okay. Would we be required to vote for it
before we get,
Before we hear that?
If, if we stay on the schedule, current schedule, yes.
We have an unhappy counselor Coleman, yes.
Very unhappy. Alright, well I,
I guess, you know, we could work with DEP
to see anything if, if we have anything preliminary
that would help the discussion.
But that remains to be seen. Okay.
Thank you. Every single person and we are adjourned.